
#Article: Carsten Spohr
#Type: regular article

Carsten Spohr (born 16 December 1966) is a German airline executive. Since May 2014 he has been the chairman and chief executive officer (CEO) of Lufthansa.

Education

After graduating with a degree in industrial engineering from the University of Karlsruhe (now part of the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology), Spohr obtained a commercial pilot's license at Lufthansa Flight Training in Bremen and the Airline Training Center Arizona. Spohr continues to maintain this license until the present day. His license allows him to fly the Airbus A320.

Career

After gaining his commercial pilot’s license, Spohr enjoyed a brief role at Deutsche Aerospace AG after enrolling in the company’s management training programme. Following this, Spohr joined Lufthansa in 1994. Between 1995 and 1998, he served as the personal assistant to the CEO of the company. After this role, he moved on to head various regional partnerships at Lufthansa, for example in 1998, he became head of regional partner management. He was then soon appointed to lead the group’s passenger airline strategy. In 2007, he was made CEO of Lufthansa Cargo. In 2011, in recognition of his loyalty to the company, he was invited to join the executive board. On 1 May 2014 he took over from Christoph Franz as Chief Executive Officer of Deutsche Lufthansa AG. During his time as CEO there have been poor industrial relations, with a number of strike actions, due to the push to expand Lufthansa's low-cost airline Germanwings.

Spohr oversaw the Germanwings Flight 9525 disaster which he described as "the darkest day for Lufthansa in its 60-year history".

According to his profile on Bloomberg, his annual compensation amounts to around €2.7 million.

In May 2014, Spohr was one of a number of business executives invited to the White House by U.S. President Barack Obama in a meeting aimed at extending job opportunities from international companies to the U.S.

Personal life

Spohr is married with two daughters, and lives in Munich. Spohr’s wife Vivian is head of Lufthansa’s Help Alliance which runs aid projects in numerous countries abroad.


