
#Article: Hans-Peter Wild
#Type: regular article

Hans-Peter Wild (born 16 June 1941) is a German entrepreneur and lawyer. He is the owner and chairman of Rudolf Wild GmbH & Co. KG, which, according to company information, is the world's largest private manufacturer of natural flavor ingredients for food products and beverages.

Biography

Hans-Peter Wild was born in Heidelberg in 1941, the son of Rudolf Wild, who founded the Wild company in 1931. He passed the first state examination as a lawyer in Heidelberg with distinction. He completed a degree in business studies in Mannheim, majoring in fiscal law and auditing. He completed a PhD entitled "The market-dominating company under French law" at the Faculty of Law at the University of Mannheim. After graduation, he worked at the Diersch & Schröder group of companies for four years as managing director, being responsible for the companies mineral oil, chemistry and shipping activities. In 1974, he joined his parents' company - with the aim of expanding the world markets with Capri Sun and taking the company global.

Wild has stood for the internationalization of the company ever since. Wild also used the international market knowledge that he gained for the extensive international expansion of the division dealing with natural flavor ingredients for food products and beverages. He now develops and markets food and beverage ingredients worldwide under the motto "We create great taste".

Social involvement

Wild is President of the "Leonie Wild Charitable Foundation", which he initiated together with his mother Leonie Wild in 1997. The trust helps citizens in need and is involved in social and cultural projects, particularly in Eppelheim and in the Heidelberg region. In addition to its support for the construction of the new Heidelberg Children's Hospital, it has also been supporting the "Ballschule" ball-sports academy at the University of Heidelberg since 2001. The Ballschule provides supplementary sports classes for children in the first and second grade (source: Rhein-Neckar-Zeitung, June 22, 2006). Wild also assists the University of Heidelberg through donations, thus continuing the tradition started by his father Rudolf Wild.

Academic involvement

Wild was a guest lecturer at St. Kliment Ohridski University in Sofia in 1993 as part of an initiative by the Stiftung Bulgarische Hochschulförderung (German-Bulgarian foundation for the support of Bulgarian universities), sharing his practical business experience as an entrepreneur. He donated a professorship to the International Institute for Management Development (IMD) in Lausanne. In the end of 2001 the IMD Lombard Odier Business Center was extended by the Wild Group Chair for Family Business.

Sports involvement

In October 2007, Wild was instrumental in the formation of the Wild Rugby Academy, an institution aimed at developing the sport of rugby union in Germany.

He also financially supports the Heidelberger RK, one of only two professional rugby clubs in Germany, in a sport otherwise fully amateur.

Awards

The Ruprecht Karl University of Heidelberg made Wild an honorary senator in recognition of his many years of service in 1996. The town of Eppelheim made him an honorary citizen in June 2006 for his entrepreneurial achievements and his many years of commitment to the employees of WILD GmbH & Co. KG and the social facilities in Eppelheim and the region.

Publications

	Das marktbeherrschende Unternehmen im französischen Recht (The market-dominating company under French law), dissertation, Mannheim 1969 

	Capri-Sonne. Die Faszination einer Weltmarke, (Capri-Sun. The fascination of a global brand) Frankfurt am Main 2001 ISBN 3-89843-036-7 


