
#Article: Paula Vesala
#Type: regular article

Paula Julia Vesala (born 10 December 1981 in Kärsämäki, Finland) is a Finnish singer, actor and a playwright. She was the other singer in the pop rock duo PMMP, along with Mira Luoti. She is also the main lyricist of the songs.

Biography

Vesala has been educated at the Sibelius Academy in Helsinki, with studies in music education, classical singing, piano and violin.

She has also provided the Finnish voice for several movies such as Tinker Bell, Happily N'Ever After, Arthur and the Minimoys and High School Musical 1, 2 and 3. She has acted both in movies and in Theater.

In 2010 she was chosen the Artist of the Year by Kuopio Music High School.

In addition Paula Vesala has composed and written songs for other artists such as Johanna Kurkela, Jenni Vartiainen, Vesa-Matti Loiri, Martti Saarinen, Katri Ylander, Tiktak, Petra, Antti Tuisku, Anna Abreu, Uusi Fantasia, Freeman, Katri Helena, Jippu, Samuli Edelmann, Stig, Jesse Kaikuranta and Aṣa.

She has also composed music to Finnish theaters, such as The Finnish National Theater, to the play "Neljäs Tie" directed by Esa Leskinen.

She acted in a silent film called "Myrsky" (Tempest) by director Elina Oikari at TaiK in 2013 and had the role of Prince Ferdinand.

She translated Benny Andersson's, Lars Rudolfsson's and Björn Ulvaeus' musical Kristina från Duvemåla, and the ABBA songs in the musical Mamma Mia from Swedish to Finnish for Svenska Teatern.

In 2013 together with the other members of PMMP she was awarded by the Ministry of Education and Culture in Helsinki with the Finland Prize.The Prizes recognised important figures in the Finnish cultural landscape, coming from widely varying fields.The pop-duo PMMP were commended for offering new role models for young women.

She has a son named Julius who was born in April 2008. The father is Finnish singer Lauri Ylönen.

Paula Vesala married her longtime partner Lauri Ylönen on 8 November 2014 in Las Vegas; the couple filed a statement on 29 December 2014; the marriage was registered in Helsinki, January 5, 2015.

Educations

	Pohjois-Savon Ammattikorkeakoulu (Savonia Polytechinc)Music Pedagogy / major: classical singing 2000 - 2002

	Sibelius Academy: Department: Music Education / major: music education 2002 - 2011

	The Theater Academy Helsinki: Dramaturgy degree program / major: dramaturgy and playwriting 2011 - 2014

	UCLA-University of California, Los Angeles in MFA Playwriting program at TFT (School of Theater, Film and Television) 2014 - 2015

PMMP

PMMP was a Finnish band fronted by singers Paula Vesala and Mira Luoti and backed by musicians Mikko Virta, Juho Vehmanen and Heikki Kytölä. The name of the band is often said to be an abbreviation of the sentence "Paulan ja Miran Molemmat Puolet", which can be translated in English as "Both Sides of Paula and Mira". However, in an interview on the Finnish talk show Krisse Show, they stated that the name of the band comes, like ABBA, from the names of 4 of its members: so PMMP is Paula, Mira, Mira, Paula. PMMP's albums are produced by Jori Sjöroos who also wrote the music for all the songs. The lyrics are written by Paula and Mira, mostly Paula. The band is an acclaimed live act. PMMP has been called one of the biggest and most important bands of the decade with a huge impact on the music scene in Finland.

PMMP first became well known in Finland with the 2003 summer hit Rusketusraidat (Tan Lines). They then enjoyed great success with their second album Kovemmat kädet (Rougher Hands), which went gold (double platinum year 2010). An extended version of the album was released in August 2005. Oo siellä jossain mun, a single from the aforementioned album, is PMMP's biggest hit so far in Finland.

In November 2006 PMMP released their third album Leskiäidin tyttäret (Daughters of a widow mother), which went platinum on the day it was released.

They released an album labeled Puuhevonen (Wooden Horse) with traditional children's songs in 2007, around the time their first children were born. In 2009 they released their fourth rock/pop album Veden varaan (Overboard, or Afloat) and their fifth album Rakkaudesta (Out of love, or About love) was released in 2012.

PMMP played their final concert on October 27, 2013 at the Helsinki Ice Hall. They sold out two nights in The Helsinki Ice Hall, 26.10.2013 and 27.10.2013.

Finnish Grammys

Together with her band PMMP, they won a total of 9 Finnish Grammys. The categories are:

	2003 - Pop-rock newcomer

	2005 - Album of the year Kovemmat kädet (Rougher Hands), Pop album Kovemmat kädet and Best band

	2006 - Album of the year Leskiäidin tyttäret (Daughters of a widow mother) and Pop album Leskiäidin tyttäret

	2009 - Album of the year Veden varaan (Overboard, or Afloat), Rock album Veden varaan and Best band

Kerkko Koskinen Kollektiivi

Kerkko Koskinen Kollektiivi is a Finnish band formed by Kerkko Koskinen (Ultra Bra) with Vuokko Hovatta (Ultra Bra), Paula Vesala (PMMP) and Manna. In January 2014 Paula Vesala informed that she had left the group. She was replaced by Maija Vilkkumaa.

Kollektiivi has released two albums, “Kerkko Koskinen Kollektiivi” (which also won the Finnish gold record music prize) in 2012 and “2” in 2014.

Vain elämää

In 2014 Paula Vesala took part in the 3rd season of Vain elämää together with other Finnish artists like Samuli Edelmann, Elastinen, Paula Koivuniemi, Vesa-Matti Loiri, Jenni Vartiainen, and Toni Wirtanen.The season aired from 19 September to 7 November 2014.At the end of the series 3, compilation album Vain Elämää - Kausi ilta was released WEA / Warner The album topped the Finnish Albums Chart.Also released was the compilation Vain Elämää - Kausi 3 päivä that reached number 2 in Finnish Albums Chart.

Discography

Albums

Singles

Filmography

Movies

TV Series

Animation movies


