
#Article: Zorana Mihajlović
#Type: regular article

Zorana Mihajlović (Зорана Михајловић, , born 5 May 1970 in Tuzla, Yugoslavia) is deputy prime minister, and the Minister of Construction, Transport and Infrastructure in the Government of Serbia.

Biography

Mihajlović was born in May 1970 in Tuzla, SR Bosnia and Herzegovina, but she finished her elementary and secondary school in Belgrade, Serbia. She graduated from the University of Belgrade Faculty of Economics in 1993 with a degree in Foreign and Domestic Trade. Her thesis was titled Energy Resources in European Economic Community.

She received her M.A. degree in 1998 at Faculty of Economics with the thesis Energy Sector of Serbia and Selected European Countries - France, Germany and Sweden.

Mihajlović obtained a Ph.D. degree in 2001 from the Faculty of Economics with the thesis Energy and Economic Development - Analyses of Interdependence between Serbia and Countries of European Union. In 2006, she became research associate at Faculty of Economics, and since 2008 she has been an associate professor at Megatrend University.

She has published three books and several dozen scientific papers. 

Personal life

Mihajlović is fluent in English and has working knowledge of French and Italian. She has one son.

Professional career

Mihajlović worked for nearly 15 years in her profession, first as a Professor of Accounting and Business Economy at First High School in Economics in Belgrade. From 1996 to 2006, she worked at the Electric Power Industry of Serbia (EPS), in the Elektroistok public company for electric power transport. She was a member of the EPS’s Board of Management from 2004 to 2007. Since 2008, she has worked as an associate professor at Megatrend University in Belgrade.

Political career

Zorana Mihajlović started her political career as a member of G17 Plus party. During that time she worked as advisor for Energy and Environmental Protection to Miroljub Labus, deputy prime minister in the Government of Serbia. She was head of the Sector for Energy and Environmental Protection Politics, and from 2005 to 2006 she was also head of the Cabinet.

Mihajlović joined the Serbian Progressive Party in April 2010. She soon became a member of the Executive Board of the Serbian Progressive Party. During the 2012 campaign for Serbian general elections, Zorana Mihajlović was a leader in the campaign for her Serbian Progressive Party.

On 27 July 2012, Mihajlović was elected Minister of Energy, Development and Environmental Protection in the Government of Serbia.


