
#Article: Rosanna Arquette
#Type: regular article

Rosanna Lisa Arquette (; born August 10, 1959) is an American actress, film director, and producer.

Early life

Arquette was born in New York City, the daughter of Brenda Olivia "Mardi" (née Nowak; 1939-1997), an actress, poet, theater operator, activist, acting teacher, and therapist, and Lewis Arquette (1935-2001), a film actor, writer, and producer. Her paternal grandfather was comedian Cliff Arquette. Her mother was Jewish (from a family that emigrated from Poland and Russia). Her father was a convert from Catholicism to Islam; through him, Rosanna is distantly related to explorer Meriwether Lewis. Her siblings, Patricia, Alexis, Richmond, and David Arquette, are also actors.

Career

Arquette has appeared in both television and screen films. In 1982, she earned an Emmy Award nomination for the TV film The Executioners Song. Arquettes first starring role was in John Sayless 1983 film, Baby Its You, a highly regarded but little seen film. She starred in Desperately Seeking Susan (1985) alongside pop singer Madonna, for which she won a British Academy Film Awards (BAFTA) for her "supporting" role despite her clearly being the lead. Madonna was breaking out at the time and though many feel that while Arquettes performance was central to the movies success, Madonna made the movie into a mainstream hit. She had negotiated a deal where she would provide a song for the movie. "Into The Groove" became a huge hit for Madonna as did the movie itself. In an interview at the time, Arquette said "The two questions I hate the most are What was it like working with Madonna? and Are you the Rosanna in the song Rosanna?" Following the commercial and critical success of Lawrence Kasdans Silverado in 1985, and the failure of both After Hours and 8 Million Ways to Die, she quit Hollywood to work in Europe where she acted in Luc Bessons The Big Blue (1988).

In 1989, director Martin Scorsese offered her a part in New York Stories. Other movies of note are Pulp Fiction and the David Cronenberg film, Crash and the Australian film Wendy Cracked a Walnut (1990) (also known as …Almost). In 1990, Arquette appeared on the cover and in a nude pictorial in Playboys September issue, although she claimed it was without her prior knowledge or consent.

In recent years, Arquette has expanded into directing, including the documentaries Searching for Debra Winger (2002) and All We Are Saying (2005); she also produced both projects.

Arquette appeared in the short running What About Brian as Nicole Varsi and on Showtimes The L Word as Cherie Jaffe. She also guest starred on Malcolm in the Middle as a healer named Anita who takes Malcolms virginity. Bryan Cranston, one of her former co-stars from Amazon Women on the Moon, also played Malcolms dad Hal.

In 2009, she joined Fit Parent Magazine, founded by Craig Knight, as Editor at Large. Arquette stars in the French thriller The Divide, directed by Xavier Gens.

Personal life

In August 2013, Arquette married her fourth husband, investment banker Todd Morgan, following a two-year engagement. Her previous marriages, to director Tony Greco, musical composer James Newton Howard, and restaurateur John Sidel, all ended in divorce. She has one daughter, Zoe Bleu, with Sidel.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations


