
#Article: Colin O'Donoghue
#Type: regular article

Colin O'Donoghue (born 26 January 1981) is an Irish actor and musician known for his role as Captain Killian "Hook" Jones on the TV show Once Upon a Time, and his role as Michael Kovak in The Rite.

Early life and education

O'Donoghue, the son of Con and Mary O'Donoghue, was born and raised in Drogheda, County Louth, in a Roman Catholic family. He attended local schools, and later The Gaiety School of Acting in Dublin. At age 17 O'Donoghue went to Paris for a month to learn French.

Career

O'Donoghue's early career was mainly split between theatre and television work in Ireland and the UK. In 2003, he won the Irish Film and Television Award for "Best New Talent" for his role as Norman in "Home For Christmas".

In 2009, he appeared as Duke Philip of Bavaria in an episode of season 3 of the Showtime historical-fiction series The Tudors. He made his Hollywood film debut alongside Anthony Hopkins in the horror thriller film The Rite (2011). He made an audition video for The Rite in a friend's home studio in Drogheda and sent it to the United States. He plays guitar and sings in a band called The Enemies, formed in 2003 in Ireland.

In 2012, O'Donoghue was cast as Captain Hook/Killian Jones in the second season of the hit ABC series Once Upon a Time. In 2014, O'Donoghue was cast as the main character in "The Dust Storm", an independent film set in Nashville, Tennessee as a musician called "Brennan".

Christina Perri wrote a song "The Words" which she dedicated to Colin's character (Captain Hook) in Once Upon a Time 

The Enemies

O'Donoghue was part of the five-piece Irish band, "The Enemies", which was formed in 2003 by O'Donoghue and a close friend, Ronan McQuillan. The Enemies released their self-titled debut EP on 7 March 2011 prior to their self-funded first album on track. He played guitar and sang backing vocals on the band's first EP and debut album. 

Although the band was unsigned, it was commissioned by General Motors to record tracks for their "Chevy route 66" online campaign. The band worked on the music for Coca-Cola's "5BY20" project. Their debut album Sounds Big on the Radio was to be released in March 2013, which was later scheduled for 2014. In May 2013, he announced he was leaving the band due to the filming schedule of Once Upon a Time.

Awards

For his role in Home for Christmas, he was awarded Best New Talent at the 1st Irish Film & Television Awards, held on 1 November 2003.

Personal life

O'Donoghue and his wife Helen, a schoolteacher, have a son. 

O'Donoghue had not made plans to relocate to Los Angeles or Vancouver, Canada where he is shooting Once Upon A Time. He explained, "You don't know what circumstances are going to come up, so it's tough to make a decision like that and move somewhere for two or three years ... Whatever happens, Drogheda will always be my home because it is where my friends and family are." O'Donoghue often wears a silver crucifix his wife gave him because his faith is important to him.

Filmography

Theatre

Awards and nominations

See also

	 List of Irish people


