
#Article: Mia Love
#Type: regular article

Ludmya Bourdeau "Mia" Love (born December 6, 1975) is an American politician and the U.S. Representative from Utah's 4th congressional district. She is the first Haitian American and the first black female Republican in Congress, as well as the first African American to be elected to Congress from Utah.

Born to Haitian parents in Brooklyn, New York, Love was elected as the Mayor of Saratoga Springs, Utah, serving from 2010 to 2014. She was previously on its city council. In 2012, Love ran for Utah's 4th congressional district, losing narrowly to incumbent Democratic Representative Jim Matheson. She was a speaker at the 2012 Republican National Convention. She was elected as a Republican to the House of Representatives on November 4, 2014, defeating Democratic opponent Doug Owens, son of the former Congressman of the same name.

Early life and education

Love was born Ludmya Bourdeau on December 6, 1975, in Brooklyn, New York, the daughter of Mary and Jean Maxine Bourdeau. At a time of political repression, her parents emigrated together from Haiti in 1973, leaving their two older children behind with family. Her father had been threatened by the Tonton Macoute, the secret police in Haiti, and her parents traveled to the United States on a tourist visa. They spoke only French when they arrived. Her father became a paint-company manager and her mother worked as a nurse.

Love's birth enabled her parents to gain a US residency permit (green card) under an immigration law that favored immigrants from the Western Hemisphere who had a child born in the United States; it expired in early 1976.  They became naturalized citizens. 

When Love was five, her family moved from Brooklyn to Norwalk, Connecticut. Love attended Norwalk High School. She was raised as a Roman Catholic in the faith of her parents. After the family settled in Norwalk, her parents brought her older siblings from Haiti to reunite the family.

Love attended the University of Hartford with a half-tuition scholarship. She graduated with a degree in the performing arts. While at the University of Hartford, she participated in the Hartt School's Music Theatre program.

After college, she worked at Sento Corporation and the Ecopass Corporation. She was also a flight attendant with Continental Airlines. She moved to Utah in 1998 after converting to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and while working for Continental. There she married Jason Love.

Early political career

Love began to be active in civic affairs when she served as the community spokesperson in Saratoga Springs in an effort to get the developer of her neighborhood to spray against flies.

Love won a seat on the Saratoga Springs City Council (Utah County) in 2003, a city of about 18,000 near Salt Lake City. The small new city was established in 1997 and has had rapid growth. She was the first female Haitian-American elected official in Utah County, Utah; she took office in January 2004. 

During an economic downturn, as part of the city council Love approved a transition from the agriculture tax to municipal tax. She worked with other city council members to cut expenses, reducing the city's shortfall during the economic downturn from $3.5 million to $779,000. Saratoga Springs now has the highest possible bond rating for a city of its size.

After six years on the Council, Love was elected Mayor, winning with 861 votes to 594 for her opponent Jeff Francom. Love was elected as Mayor of Saratoga Springs, serving from January 2010 to January 2014. During her term as mayor, Love led the city in dealing with natural disasters, including a wildfire, which was followed shortly afterward by a severe mudslide.

Congressional campaigns

2012 congressional election

Love ran in Utah's 4th congressional district, which was created after the 2010 Census. She competed for the Republican nomination against attorney Jay Cobb and State Reps. Stephen Sandstrom of Orem and Carl Wimmer of Herriman; she won the nomination on April 21, 2012 at the 2012 Utah Republican Party Convention with over 70 percent of the vote. She faced six-term Democratic incumbent Jim Matheson in the general election, who was redistricted into the 4th, losing some of his reliably Democratic constituents.

Nationally, Love received campaign support from 2012 Republican Presidential nominee Mitt Romney and his wife Ann Romney, House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, House Budget Committee Chairman and 2012 Republican Vice Presidential nominee Paul Ryan and Speaker of the House John Boehner.

In 2012, National Journal named Love one of ten Republicans to follow on Twitter.  When speaking to the 2012 Republican National Convention on August 28, 2012, she discussed lessons learned from her parents, immigrants from Haiti who fled political repression.  She said, "Mr. President, I am here to tell you we are not buying what you are selling in 2012."

In September 2012, questions arose about her parents' immigrant status. Forbes investigated a claim in an article that month in Mother Jones that no law existed in 1976 that would have allowed Love's parents to become citizens of the United States after her birth. Forbes found that immigrants who had been residents of the Western Hemisphere could get long-term residency permits (green cards) if they had a child born in the United States. Mother Jones issued a correction. Love did not make her family's papers available for review. In an October 2012 interview, her father said that Mia's birth as a US citizen was key to him and his wife gaining permanent legal status and ultimately citizenship.

Love lost the election to Jim Matheson by 768 votes out of 245,277 votes cast, a difference of 0.31%. She was regarded to have run a weak campaign, switching campaign managers three times, trying to "nationalize" the race rather than focus on local issues, and missing interviews and appointments because of rifts in her campaign staff.

2014 election

In March 2013, Love said she was seriously considering another run against Matheson. In May 2013 she announced she would run in 2014. , Love had raised over $475,000 for her campaign. Love was an opening speaker at the 2013 Western Conservative Summit. She spoke of the need for increased grassroots organization in the GOP, and the need to be independent from the government.

In August 2013, Love was chosen by Newsmax as an "Up and Comer" in their list of top "25 Influential Women of the GOP," given her visible position as a young black female Republican in a party known for its lack of diversity. In November 2013, Love acknowledged the growing consensus that the Tea Party needed to shift away from being the "party of no," disagreeing with its part in forcing a federal government shutdown over the budget. But, she reiterated her support for the philosophy of the Tea Party and many of its leaders, including Utah Sen. Mike Lee.

On December 17, 2013, Matheson announced that he would not run for re-election. Love was ranked as the favored candidate due to her name recognition and characteristics of the district. In early October 2014, the National Journal listed Utah's 4th district as the number one most likely district to change hands in November.

In early 2014 Love was made a member of the Republican National Committee's National Advisory Council on African-American outreach. On April 26, 2014 Love won the Republican nomination for the 4th congressional district at the Utah Republican Convention, with 78% of the vote at the convention.

On election night, Owens led Love until late in the evening, when she pulled ahead and ultimately won by more than 4,000 votes. Owens has said that he may run against Love in 2016.

U.S. House of Representatives

With the start of the new congress, Love was appointed to the House Financial Services Committee.Love joined the Congressional Black Caucus in January 2015 after taking her seat.

In May 2015 she was a lead sponsor along with Duncan Hunter of HR 2518 the "Student Right to Know Before You Go Act," designed to increase the amount of information universities and colleges were required to provide prospective students.

In October 2015, Love was named to serve on the Select Investigative Panel on Planned Parenthood.

Political positions

A Tea Party conservative, Love says she favors "fiscal discipline, limited government, and personal responsibility." She has also said that she asks herself three questions whenever she approaches an issue: "Is it affordable? Is it sustainable? Is it my job?" She has said that at her college orientation, Love's father told her: "Mia, your mother and I never took a handout. You will not be a burden to society. You will give back." She underscored this philosophy on the campaign trail in 2014 to sum up her conservative views.

Abortion

Love is pro-life and has been endorsed by the Susan B. Anthony List.

Spending and taxes

During her first run for Congress, Love proposed deep cuts to federal spending, particularly in the area of entitlement spending. She also supports cutting taxes. She supported major cuts to foreign aid, block grants in a wide range of programs, and tort reform. She believes that the Federal government should have less power. In 2014 Love focused more on balancing the budget, avoiding stating specific cuts needed but identifying the goal of matching spending to revenue. Love supported the March 2015 budget, which required an increase in federal employee contributions to their retirement funds.

Other issues

Love supported domestic energy exploration, local control of education, Second Amendment rights, and state control of public lands.

Congressional Black Caucus

While campaigning in 2012, Love had said that if elected, she would “join the Congressional Black Caucus and try to take that thing apart from the inside out.” She has described the mainly Democratic Caucus as characterized by...demagoguery. They sit there and ignite emotions and ignite racism when there isn’t. They use their positions to instill fear. Hope and change is turned into fear and blame. Fear that everybody is going to lose everything and blaming Congress for everything instead of taking responsibility.

Personal life

Raised a Roman Catholic, Love joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints after graduating from college in 1998. While working as a flight attendant, she moved to Utah as part of her work. She also wanted to be closer to the temple and to learn more about her faith. There she got to know Jason Love, whom she had met briefly when he was an LDS missionary in Connecticut.

The two were married in December 1998, four months after their first date. Love turned down an offer to appear in the Broadway show Smokey Joe's Café that would start two days before her marriage. When first married, the Loves lived in American Fork. They have three children together. The Loves decided that Jason should continue his software work and maintain their residence in Utah.

Electoral history


