
#Article: Jane Pauley
#Type: regular article

Margaret Jane Pauley (born October 31, 1950), better known as Jane Pauley, is an American television anchor and journalist, and has been involved in news reporting since 1975. She is best known for her 13-year tenure on NBC's Today program, followed by 12 years as co-host of Dateline NBC, and for her public acknowledgements of her struggle with bipolar disorder.

Early life

Pauley competed in debate and public speaking tournaments through the Indiana High School Forensic Association while enrolled at Warren Central High School in Indianapolis, which she graduated from in 1968. She subsequently earned a scholarship to Indiana University, where she was involved in the Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority. After college, she worked from 1972 to 1975 at then-CBS affiliate WISH-TV in Indianapolis. In 1975 Pauley joined WMAQ-TV in Chicago, marking the beginning of her career with NBC.

Career

Today

From 1976 to 1989 Pauley was the co-host, with Tom Brokaw from 1976-81 and Bryant Gumbel from 1982-89, of NBC's Today. She also anchored the Sunday edition of NBC Nightly News from 1980-82. Following in the footsteps, both in career and in style, of the first female anchor of the show, Barbara Walters, she became a symbol for professional women, more specifically, female journalists. In her autobiography, And So It Goes, Pauley's colleague Linda Ellerbee wrote, "She (Pauley) is what I want to be when I grow up". NBC briefly experimented with a trio of anchors, Pauley, Gumbel, and Chris Wallace, before returning to a co-anchor format with Gumbel.In 1989, following months of conjecture about Pauley's publicly reported dislike of the grueling morning assignment and ambition to work in prime-time television, she announced her resignation from Today. Speculation in the media seemed to imply that NBC executives had eased her out to advance younger NBC newscaster Deborah Norville, who had begun to play a larger role in the two-hour morning program.

After leaving The Today Show, Pauley hosted Real Life with Jane Pauley and served as deputy anchor for NBC Nightly News.

In 1990, Pauley co-hosted the 42nd Primetime Emmy Awards, alongside Candice Bergen and Jay Leno.

Dateline NBC

From 1992 to 2003, Pauley co-hosted NBC's Dateline NBC. On February 9, 1993, at the end of a regularly scheduled edition of Dateline, Pauley, along with co-host Stone Phillips, delivered a public apology to General Motors on behalf of NBC. While Pauley had no connection to the story, the apology was apparently part of a settlement of a lawsuit resulting from the now debunked 1993 report which aired on Dateline on November 17, 1992.

The Jane Pauley Show

 

 

 

In 2009, Pauley joined the Board of Directors of The Mind Trust, an Indianapolis-based non-profit organization that supports education innovation and reform. 

Return to Today

 

On December 30, 2013, Pauley, former Today co-host Bryant Gumbel, current Today anchor Matt Lauer and current weather anchor Al Roker (who was live in Pasadena, California) reunited to co-host a special reunion edition of Today.

CBS

On April 27, 2014, Pauley began contributing to CBS Sunday Morning as a correspondent.  

Accolades

In 1979, the Supersisters trading card set was produced and distributed; one of the cards featured Pauley's name and picture.

In 1998 she won the Paul White Award, from the Radio Television Digital News Association.

Personal life

She announced her diagnosis of bipolar disorder in 2004, the same year she published her autobiography, Skywriting: A Life Out of the Blue, and launched her daytime talk show.

In October 2006, Pauley and her lawyers filed a lawsuit against The New York Times for allegedly duping her into lending her name and likeness to an advertising supplement popular with drug companies. Pauley maintains she believed she was being interviewed by a Times reporter.

Pauley is married to the cartoonist Garry Trudeau, author of Doonesbury, and they have three children.


