
#Article: Gideon Moi
#Type: regular article

Gideon Moi (born 1964) is a Kenyan politician who has served in the Senate of Kenya, representing Baringo County, since 2013. He was elected with a landslide win of over 80%, trouncing his opponent Jackson Kosgei. He is also the Chairman of the Kenya African National Union (KANU), which for decades was the ruling party in Kenya. He is the youngest son of Kenya's second president, Daniel arap Moi, and Lena Moi.

Education and career

Gideon's primary school education was at the elite Kenton College Preparatory School. He was one of 24 students enrolled to attend Strathmore College when it opened its doors to secondary school students in 1977. He would remain there from 1977 to 1980. After his father's ascension to power in August 1978, following the death of President Jomo Kenyatta, Gideon became a disengaged student. Despite Gideons's poor grades, his father (President Moi) used his influence and Gideon was allowed to attend St. Mary's School, Nairobi from 1981 to 1982 alongside his lifelong friend, Uhuru Kenyatta.  Gideon then embarked on a career in business where with his father's help he was quite successful. There have been and continue to be many allegations of corruption regarding his business dealings but investigations into corruption in Kenya have stalled.

After his father retired from politics in 2002, he ran for Baringo Central Constituency which had been previously held by his father since 1955. He represented the people of Baringo Central for one term, 2002-2007. He also wields the most influence with his father who still has considerable clout in KANU party, the former ruling party in Kenya, of which Gideon is a member.

Personal life

He is married to Zahra and has three children Kimoi, Kigen and Lulu. She is a Muslim despite Gideon being Christian. Gideon Moi has played Polo for Gilgil-based Manyatta club.

Controversy

In August 2007, The Guardian reported that the Kroll report, commissioned in 2004 by President Mwai Kibaki to trace assets of people who were suspected of looting the state, listed Gideon Moi. It reported that Gideon was worth USD 550 million.Owning large companies and cooperatives,allegedly looted from the state with help from his father.


