
#Article: Monisha Kaltenborn
#Type: regular article

Monisha Kaltenborn ( Narang; born 10 May 1971) is the current team principal of the Sauber Formula One team and holds a 33.3% stake in the outfit. She has also been the team's chief executive officer from January 2010. She is the first female team principal in Formula One.

Biography

Kaltenborn was born in Dehradun, India. Her family emigrated to Vienna when she was a child, and she took Austrian citizenship. From 1990 to 1995 she studied for a Law degree at the University of Vienna, and then completed a master's degree in International Business Law at the London School of Economics in 1996. Whilst still a student in Vienna, she worked for the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the UN Commission for International Trade Law, and on completion of her studies she worked for various legal firms: first in Stuttgart with Gleiss Lutz; then back in Vienna with Wolf & Theis; and finally for the Fritz Kaiser Group in 1998-1999.

At this stage, Kaiser was a co-owner of the Sauber Formula One team (along with founder and team principal Peter Sauber and Red Bull owner Dietrich Mateschitz), and Kaltenborn was employed to take charge of the team's corporate and legal affairs. By 2000, Kaiser had sold his shares but Kaltenborn remained with the team as the head of its legal department. From 2001, she has been a member of its management board, and in early 2010, following the team's return to independent status following the withdrawal of former partner BMW, she was appointed CEO of Sauber Motorsport AG. She is also involved in the FIA's Commission for Women and Motorsport, under Michèle Mouton. On May 16, 2012, Peter Sauber transferred a third of the Sauber team to Kaltenborn, making her a part owner. In October, he retired from front-line management of the team, handing her the role of team principal.

In her first job in Stuttgart, Monisha met Jens Kaltenborn and later married him in Dehradun. They have two children and live in Küsnacht, which is close to the Sauber factory in Hinwil, Switzerland.


