
#Article: Nolan North
#Type: regular article

Nolan Ramsey North (born October 31, 1970) is an American actor who has been described as "the nearest thing the games industry has to a bona fide leading man." His voice work includes characters such as Nathan Drake from the Uncharted series; Desmond Miles from the Assassins Creed video game series; Ghost from the Bungie title Destiny; the Penguin in the Batman: Arkham video game franchise; Cpt. Martin Walker in Spec Ops: The Line; David in The Last of Us; several characters in various pieces of Marvel media, most popularly Deadpool; Superboy in Young Justice; himself in Saints Row IV, and Edward Richtofen in the Call of Duty Zombies storyline.

Life and career

North was born in New Haven, Connecticut. He majored in journalism at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill with a baseball scholarship. He worked as a reporter for almost a year in New Jersey before moving to New York City to pursue stand-up comedy and acting. North eventually relocated to Hollywood and was cast in the General Hospital spin-off series Port Charles, playing Dr. Chris Ramsey during the show's run from 1997 to 2003. He married fellow Port Charles actress Jill Murray in 1999 and has two children. During Port Charles' run, he worked on a few video games as a voice actor and began to focus on voice acting following Port Charles' cancellation.

One of his most notable roles came in 2007 when he voiced and motion capped the character Nathan Drake for the video game Uncharted: Drake's Fortune. Since then, he has continued to portray the character in Uncharted 2: Among Thieves (released in 2009) and Uncharted 3: Drake's Deception (released in 2011). In an interview with The Guardian, North reflects on his time as Drake as requiring "a lot of imagination. Motion capture is basically theatre in Spandex; there's minimal props, and you need a willingness to make an ass of yourself." North as Drake has been twice nominated at the Spike Video Game Awards in the "Best Performance by a Human Male" category. North will reprise his role as Drake in Uncharted 4: A Thief's End, to be released in 2016.

North had a role in Star Trek Into Darkness, the sequel to 2009's live-action movie Star Trek. Director J. J. Abrams cited North's performance as Drake for the casting, he and his son being fans of the Uncharted series.

 He's a huge fan of gaming and he was telling me how people just don't understand medium yet, but they're going to catch up. They don't understand how amazing this technology is and it doesn't get the respect it deserves, but if it keeps making the money it makes you're going to see more and more people converted. I mean, Gary Oldman, one of the greatest actors on the planet, did Call of Duty. He wouldn't have done it 10 years ago. It's a new age dawning, and I'm just really proud to be part of it. Nolan North, May 21, 2012 

Other notable video game voice work includes roles as the Prince in Prince of Persia, Shun in Ar tonelico II: Melody of Metafalica, Vossler in Final Fantasy XII, Eradan in Lord of the Rings: War in the North, Doctor Edward Richtofen in Call of Duty: World at War, Call of Duty: Black Ops and Call of Duty: Black Ops II, Brawl in Transformers: War for Cybertron, the Ghost Rider in Marvel: Ultimate Alliance, Shadow Demon, Lycan, Lone Druid, Brewmaster, Gyrocopter, Ogre Magi, Meepo, Earth Spirit, Troll Warlord, the Keeper of the Light in Dota 2, and voices various Team Fortress 2 characters, including Merasmus, Redmond Mann, Blutarch Mann, Zepheniah Mann, various lines for the Engineer, and the Bombinomicon. More recently he replaced Peter Dinklage as the voice of the Ghost in Bungies Destiny - The Taken King.

North is well-known in his animation roles such as Cyclops in Wolverine and the X-Men, Snow Job in G.I. Joe: Renegades, Raphael in TMNT, both Superboy and Superman in Young Justice, and Smokescreen in Transformers: Prime.

Filmography

Animation

Live action

Films

Video games


