
#Article: Nikki Haley
#Type: regular article

Nimrata Nikki Randhawa Haley (born January 20, 1972) is an American politician and the 116th and current Governor of South Carolina. She is currently serving in her second term. A member of the Republican Party, Haley represented Lexington County in the South Carolina House of Representatives from 2005 to 2010.

When she entered the 2010 gubernatorial race, Haley gained endorsements for the Republican nomination from former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney, former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin, and the Tea Party movement, to finish first in the four-way Republican primary election on June 8, 2010, with 49% of the vote. Haley won the subsequent June 22 runoff with 65%, and proceeded to win the general election by a 51-47% margin.

Haley is the first woman to serve as Governor of South Carolina. At the age of , Haley is the youngest current governor in the United States.  She is one of two sitting Indian American governors in the United States, the other being fellow Republican Bobby Jindal of Louisiana. She might also be considered the third non-white person to have been elected as governor of a Southern state, after Virginia's L. Douglas Wilder and Louisiana's Jindal depending on whether she is considered "non-white" or not. (Notably, Nikki Haley identified herself as “white” on her voter registration card in 2001.) She also serves as an ex-officio chair of the board of trustees of the University of South Carolina during her term in office. In May 2015, she received an honorary doctorate in public service from the University.

On November 4, 2014, Haley was re-elected to a second term as the Governor of South Carolina, a term that will expire on January 9, 2019.

Early life and education

Haley was born Nimrata Nikki Randhawa  in Bamberg, South Carolina, on January 20, 1972, to an Indian Sikh family. Her parents, Ajit Singh Randhawa and Raj Kaur Randhawa, are immigrants from Amritsar District, Punjab, India. They emigrated to Canada, and arrived in the United States via the Vancouver border. She has two brothers, Mitti and Charan, and a sister, Simran, born in Singapore.

Haley is a graduate of Orangeburg Preparatory Schools, and Clemson University with a Bachelor of Science in accounting.

Career

Haley worked for FCR Corporation, a waste management and recycling company, before joining her mother's business, Exotica International, an upscale clothing firm, in 1994. The family business grew to become a multimillion-dollar company.

Haley was named to the board of directors of the Orangeburg County Chamber of Commerce in 1998.She was named to the board of directors of the Lexington Chamber of Commerce in 2003. Haley became treasurer of the National Association of Women Business Owners in 2003 and president in 2004. She chaired the Lexington Gala to raise funds for the local hospital. She also serves on the Lexington Medical Foundation, Lexington County Sheriff's Foundation, West Metro Republican Women, President of the South Carolina Chapter of the National Association of Women Business Owners, Chairman for 2006 Friends of Scouting Leadership Division campaign and is a member of the Rotary Club in Lexington.

South Carolina House of Representatives

Elections

In 2004, she ran for the South Carolina House of Representatives for a district in Lexington County. She challenged incumbent state Representative Larry Koon in the Republican primary—the real contest in this heavily Republican district. Koon, who had served since 1975, was the longest-serving member of the House. Her platform was anti-tax and fiscally conservative with an emphasis on education. In the primary election, Haley forced a runoff as Koon won just 42% of the vote. She placed second with 40% of the vote. In the runoff, Haley defeated him 55%-45%. She then ran unopposed in the general election. She became the first Indian-American to hold office in South Carolina.

She was unopposed for re-election to a second term in 2006. In 2008, she won re-election to a third term, defeating Democrat Edgar Gomez 83%-17%.

Tenure

She was elected chairwoman of the freshman caucus in 2005 and elected as majority whip in the South Carolina General Assembly. She was the only freshman legislator named to a whip spot.

	Fiscal policy

One of Haley's stated goals is to lower taxes. Haley voted against a bill to override the governor's veto (when Mark Sanford was still in office) to place a surtax on every cigarette produced. The funds earned would be appropriated to smoking prevention programs and cancer research related to smoking. She voted for a bill that raised sales taxes to six percent. The bill exempted sales tax on unprepared food such as canned goods. The same bill also exempts property tax on 'owner-occupied residential property' except for the taxes due from what is still owed on the property.

Haley has said that funds allocated for public education can be utilized more effectively. She has proposed a plan that would determine a teacher's salary based not only on seniority and qualifications but also on job performance. This performance rating would be determined by evaluations and reports from principals, students and parents. During her gubernatorial campaign, Haley stated that she would be in favor of school choice and more charter schools. She has said that wasteful spending occurs when funds allocated for education sit too long in departmental accounts before being spent.

Haley supports barring legislators from collecting legislative pensions while they're in office. She believes the pensions should be based only on the $10,400 legislative salary instead of the salary plus lawmakers' $12,000 annual expense allowance.

	Immigration policy

Haley has stated that as the daughter of immigrants, she believes the immigration laws should be enforced. She voted in favor of the law that requires employers to be able to prove that any newly hired employees are legal residents of the United States, and also requires all immigrants to carry documentation at all times proving that they are legally in the United States. The law was adopted, but is currently the subject of a lawsuit initiated by the United States Justice Department on numerous grounds, including claims the immigration law violates the Supremacy Clause. Rob Godfrey, a spokesman for Haley, said, "If the feds were doing their job, we wouldn't have had to address illegal immigration reform at the state level. But, until they do, we're going to keep fighting in South Carolina to be able to enforce our laws."

	Social policy

Haley is pro-life and consistently voted for bills that restrict abortion and bills that protect unborn fetuses. She also voted for bills that allow abortions in circumstances in which abortion might be necessary to save the woman's life. Haley voted for the Penalties for Harming an Unborn Child/Fetus law in 2006, the Pre-Abortion Ultrasound law in 2007, and the 24-Hour Waiting Period for Abortions bill in the South Carolina House of Representatives in 2009. The Penalties for Harming an Unborn Child/Fetus law says that any act of violence against a fetus is like a criminal act against the mother. The Pre-abortion Ultrasound law requires the woman considering an abortion to look at an ultrasound image before she is allowed to have an abortion. In addition, the 24-Hour Waiting Period for Abortions bill would have required the woman to wait one day from the time of the ultrasound before she is allowed to have an abortion.

Haley also voted yes on some bills relating to abortion that were tabled or rejected, including the Inclusion of Unborn Child/Fetus in Definition for Civil Suits Amendment, Prohibiting Employment Termination Due to Abortion Waiting Period amendment, and Exempting Cases of Rape from Abortion Waiting Period amendment. The Exempting Cases of Rape from Abortion Waiting Period amendment would have allowed specific cases of women to not have to wait the mandatory 24 hours before having an abortion.

Committee assignments

	 Labor, Commerce and Industry

	 Medical, Military, Public and Municipal Affairs

Caucus memberships

	 Freshman Caucus, 2005-2006 (Chair)

	 Lexington County Meth Taskforce

	 Sportsman's Caucus

	 Women's Caucus, 2007 (Vice Chair)

2010 election for Governor

On May 14, 2009, Haley announced that she would be running for the Republican nomination for Governor of South Carolina in 2010. Haley had been persuaded to run by incumbent Governor Mark Sanford. On November 11, 2009, she was endorsed by former Massachusetts governor and GOP presidential candidate Mitt Romney, as well as Jenny Sanford, the incumbent first lady of South Carolina. She was polling last in the GOP race before a surprise endorsement from former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin, three weeks before the primary vote. The Republican gubernatorial primary took place on June 8, 2010, and Haley captured 49% of the vote, necessitating a runoff election on June 22. Haley won handily in the runoff vote.

In October 2010 South Carolina pollster Crantford & Associates reported Haley barely edging Democratic challenger Vincent Sheheen in general election polling 45% to 41%.

Haley was elected governor on November 2, 2010, over the Democratic candidate, Vincent Sheheen 51% to 47%.

In July 2013, Haley was fined $3,500 by the State Ethics Commission and given a "public warning" for failing to report the addresses of eight donors during her 2010 campaign for governor.

Governorship

Economic policies

Haley supports lower taxes and opposes regulation. In inviting business to move to South Carolina she has said:"What I'm saying is, if you come to South Carolina, the cost of doing business is going to be low here. We are going to make sure that you have a loyal, willing workforce and we are going to be one of the lowest union-participation states in the country."

Other policies

Haley signed a law cracking down on illegal immigration in June 2011.She supports a law requiring photo identification at the polls.

In June 2015, following the Charleston church shooting, Haley led bi-partisan calls for the removal of the Confederate flag from the State Capitol and its grounds.

In July 2015 Haley signed a Bill to authorize removing the Confederate flag from the flagpole on the grounds of the South Carolina Capitol.

2014 re-election

On August 12, 2013, Haley announced she would seek a second term during a rally August 26, 2013, at the BI-LO Center in downtown Greenville. She faced a challenge in the primaries for Republican nomination from Tom Ervin. However Ervin withdrew and then contested the 2014 gubernatorial elections as independent.

As in 2010, Vincent Sheheen of the Democratic party was once again her challenger. Republican-turned-Independent Tom Ervin was also running in early stages of the contest, as well as Libertarian Steve French, and United Citizens Party candidate Morgan Bruce Reeves. The first public debate was held in Charleston on October 14, between French, Ervin, Haley, Reeves, and Sheheen. The second public debate in Greenville on October 21, again included all five candidates. A week after the second debate, Ervin withdrew from the race and endorsed Sheheen.

Haley was re-elected on November 4, 2014, with a 55.9 percent to 41.3 percent win, almost tripling her previous margin of victory over Sheheen in 2010 gubernatorial elections. Her second term as governor of South Carolina expires in January 2019.

Personal life

Haley was born and raised as a Sikh. On September 6, 1996, she married Michael Haley in both a Methodist church ceremony and a Sikh gurdwara. Haley identifies herself today as a Christian, but attends both Sikh and Methodist services. She sits on the board for Mt. Horeb United Methodist Church.

Her husband is an officer in the South Carolina Army National Guard and was sent on a year-long deployment to Afghanistan in January 2013. The couple have two children, Rena and Nalin.


