
#Article: Mark Finley
#Type: regular article

Mark A. Finley (born 1945) is the former host and director of It Is Written (from 1991-2004), for which he traveled around the world as a televangelist, and spoke on the weekly television show It Is Written.  He was the first Seventh-day Adventist pastor to do a satellite evangelistic series.He also served as one vice-president out of nine for the Seventh-day Adventist Church, and has written over 71 published books.

Evangelism is where Finley made his mark on the world, presenting more than 150 evangelistic meeting series around the globe in about 80 countries with resulting baptisms numbering in the thousands. His best known association is as a television speaker for the current series Experience Hope, a weekly broadcast of the Hope Channel; for the It Is Written telecast of 13 years; and also for the first two NET evangelism satellite series broadcast in North America. He was again televised for the fourth time in the autumn of 2008 as speaker for the annual North American NET series. He has preached 17 NET series broadcast throughout the world. He uses his preaching and evangelism gifts to teach others in seminars, field schools and evangelism institutes. He has written more than 70 books, as well as numerous seminar presentations, major evangelistic series, teaching manuals, and magazine articles. His recorded seminars and series, available for purchase in various media formats, numbers about 20. He also writes a series of Bible studies published monthly in Adventist World.

Finley and his wife, Ernestine “Teenie,” have teamed up in ministry throughout the years and also share a family of three grown children; Deborah, Rebecca, and Mark Jr.

Finley's family of origin are also noted professionals. His parents, James and Gloria Finley, started and managed two businesses through the years: Finley Screw Machine Products and James Wright Industries, which produced a range of different products, including a part for one of the NASA space shuttles. Finley has three younger sisters who also own and operate businesses. The oldest sister, Dale, offers writing retreats and workshops for adults, writing workshops for teens, and consulting for writing projects through her WriteLines business Writelines. She co-produces curriculum guides for high school literature books through her DaleLeigh business DaleLeigh. Dr. Sandra Doran, the middle sister, operates The Teacher Track, dedicated to promoting strategies and tools for helping ALL children meet with success. Dr. Doran is the author of hundreds of articles, as well as four books: Nobody's Boy, The House that God built, Gathering and Every Time I Say Grace, We Fight: Practical Advice for Marriages United by Love But Divided by Religion, available on Amazon. Holly Finley David, the youngest daughter, is a registered dietitian and certified diabetes educator who runs a private practice in Connecticut. With a Master's degree in Integrative Health, she is one of the few dietitians in Connecticut who specializes in the treatment of eating disorders, utilizing a holistic healing approach.

Books

	2000 and Beyond

	End Time Living

	The Next Superpower

	Satisfied

	Solid Ground

	Studying Together

	Thirteen Life-Changing Secrets

	Revelation's Predictions for a New Millennium

Books co-authored with Steven R. Mosley:

	A Religion that Works

	Confidence Amid Chaos

	Faith Against the Odds

	Jerusalem Showdown

	Hope for a New Century

	Looking for God in all the Wrong Places

	Questioning the Supernatural

	Revelation's Three Most Wanted

	Unshakable Faith

	When Faith Crumbles

	Why So Many Denominations?

Books co-authored with George Vandeman, the founder of It Is Written:

	The Overcomers

See also

	Seventh-day Adventist Church

	General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists

	It Is Written


