
#Article: Boris Muzalev
#Type: regular article

Boris Muzalev (born April 13, 1959) is a Ukrainian born selfmade businessman and politician. Muzalev is the CEO of Tavria-V and the Honorary Consul of Cyprus.

Business

Muzalev's other interests include a chain of hypermarkets and luxury supermarkets. According to Forbes Russia in 2013 his main business operation Tavria-V reported revenue of $3.7 billion and a profit of $7.2 million ranking it among the largest companies in Ukraine. In 2012 the year prior Forbes ranked Boris Muzalev as the richest man in Odessa (Ukraine's third largest city, with an estimated net worth of $209 million. His supermarket chain Tavria-V occupies almost 40% of the retail market of Odessa.

Politics

Muzalev is a member of the Socialist Party of Ukraine, the first secretary of the regional committee of Odessa STCs deputy Odessa Regional Council. 

Career

Upon graduating from Odessa Medical Institute (1981), he then became a pediatrician working in hospitals Kirovograd and Odessa regions. In 1993 he became the founder of the supermarket chain, LLC "Tavria B". In 1995 he founded the company "Dream", which today is a consultant for Foreign Affairs and Chairman of the Supervisory Board. In 1997, Muzalev becomes deputy city council Illichevsk, in 2001, was re-elected for a second term. Since 2005 he has been a member of the Socialist Party of Ukraine (SPU). Since 2006 he has been a member of the Odessa Regional Council, in the same year he was elected first secretary of the regional committee of the Socialist Party of Odessa. In 2011 Muzalev prematurely terminated his powers of a deputy in connection with the appointment of Honorary Consul of Cyprus in the Odessa region. In addition to the network of supermarkets Tavria-V Muzalev develops delicatessen stores "Space" is the leader of the project "Victory Gardens" in Odessa.

Achievements

Muzalev awarded an honorary distinction of the Socialist Party of Ukraine third degree, Diploma of the  Ministers of Ukraine "For outstanding contribution to the reform of the national economy, business development, market infrastructure, high achievements in their professional activity and in honor of the entrepreneur" (2004 ). In 2011, the magazine Forbes gave Muzaleva 18 among the largest Ukrainian rentier estimated its rental income of $ 16 million in the list of the "100 richest people in Ukraine," the same publication Muzalev takes place No.62. In 2012, his fortune is estimated at $172 million by Magazine Focus which also included Muzaleva along with his brother Michael in the ranking of the 200 richest people of Ukraine 2012 coming in at No.116 with $80million.

See Also

	Odessa National Medical University

	Tavria-V


