
#Article: Gianni Infantino
#Type: regular article

Gianni Infantino (born 23 March 1970 in Brig) is a Swiss football administrator of Italian origin. He has been the general secretary of UEFA since 2009 and holds both Swiss and Italian nationality.

On 26 October 2015, Infantino received the full backing of the UEFA Executive Committee to stand for the position of FIFA president in the upcoming FIFA Extraordinary Congress. On the same day, he confirmed his candidacy and that he submitted the required declarations of support.

A multi-lingual lawyer, he is married and has four children.

Biography

Gianni Infantino was born on 23 March 1970 in Brig, Switzerland. He is of Italian origin. He studied law at the University of Fribourg (Switzerland) and speaks English, French, German, Spanish and Italian fluently.

Prior to joining UEFA, Gianni Infantino worked as the Secretary General of the International Centre for Sports Studies (CIES) at the University of Neuchâtel, having previously been an adviser to a variety of football bodies in Italy, Spain and Switzerland.

Career at UEFA

Gianni Infantino is currently the General Secretary of UEFA, a position he has held since October 2009. Since his appointment, he has been part of a leadership team which has helped to further strengthen both national team and club football in Europe, and UEFA's role as a respected and credible international governing body.

At the helm of UEFA's administration, Gianni Infantino has intensified UEFA's work to provide a sustainable environment for European football, through initiatives such as Financial Fair Play, improved commercial support to national associations of all sizes and the development of UEFA's competitions at every level of the game. He oversaw the expansion of UEFA Euro 2016 to 24 teams. and played an integral role in the conception of the UEFA Nations League and the UEFA Euro 2020 that will see the tournament take place in 13 European nations. He is currently also serving as a member of FIFA's Reform Committee.

A multilingual lawyer, Gianni Infantino came to UEFA in August 2000, working on a range of legal, commercial and professional football matters, and was appointed Director of UEFA's Legal Affairs and Club Licensing Division in January 2004. Throughout this time he also led UEFA's work in fostering close contacts with the European Union, the Council of Europe and governmental authorities. He was promoted to Deputy General Secretary in 2007.

vs Greek government

In 2015, the Greek government decided to intrroduce a new sports law, regarding the recent 2015 Greek football scandal and acts of violence and corruption mainly in the Greek football. Gianni Infantino, as UEFA's general secretary, was head in the negotiations with the Greek government. UEFA and FIFA supported the Hellenic Football Federation and sent a warning to Greece that it faces suspension from international football for its government interference.

FIFA presidential candidate

Gianni Infantino confirmed his decision to stand for the position of FIFA President on 26 October 2015, following the unanimous backing of UEFA Executive Committee on the same day. He has submitting the required declarations of support. He wants to expand the FIFA World Cup to 40 teams if elected FIFA president.


