
#Article: Dylan Neal
#Type: regular article

Dylan Joseph Neal (born October 8, 1969) is a Canadian actor. He holds dual citizenship in Canada and the United States. He is known for his portrayal of the character Dylan Shaw on the soap opera The Bold and the Beautiful, Doug Witter on Dawson's Creek, and Detective Mike Celluci in the supernatural series Blood Ties. He also played Aaron Jacobs on Sabrina, the Teenage Witch.

In 2013, Neal landed the lead role opposite Andie MacDowell in the Hallmark Channel's first ever scripted TV series, Cedar Cove. The series premiered on July 20, 2013, and is based on the series of books by the same name, written by Debbie Macomber.

Personal life

Dylan Neal was born in Richmond Hill, Ontario, in 1969. Six months after his birth, his family moved to Oakville, Ontario. He attended Appleby College in Oakville, and initially wanted to become a professional squash player.

Neal transferred to Blakelock High School in Oakville for his last two years of schooling. It was there that he gained an interest in the performing arts and participated in his school's drama program. In light of his newfound passion and upon the advice of his drama teacher, Neal decided he wanted to make a career of acting.

Before becoming an actor, Neal was a caterer and delivered lunch baskets to private businesses in industrial areas around Toronto.  He also delivered pizzas for a living before making it as an actor.

Career

Neal has said that after finishing his work on The Bold and the Beautiful, he was initially concerned about his ability to find another acting job after coming from a soap opera. "There are certain expectations--or a certain lack of expectations--of soap opera actors," he said.

In 2007, Neal gained popularity among the sci-fi/fantasy genre fan base after taking on the role of Detective Mike Celluci in Lifetime's Canadian vampire fantasy show Blood Ties, in which he starred alongside Christina Cox and Kyle Schmid. The producers of the show ultimately chose Neal, Cox, and Schmid as the three leads of the show over other auditioning actors after observing the natural chemistry among the trio.  Neal later commented that fans often compliment the three actors for their charming on-screen chemistry and camaraderie.

Neal currently plays the male lead opposite Andie MacDowell in the television series Cedar Cove for the Hallmark Channel. Neal plays Jack Griffith, a Philadelphia reporter. He played Bob Adams in the highly anticipated film adaptation Fifty Shades of Grey (2015).

Filmography


