
#Article: John Fentener van Vlissingen
#Type: regular article

John Arthur Fentener van Vlissingen (born 4 March 1939, Utrecht) is a Dutch businessman. He is one of the wealthiest people in the Netherlands and has made major investments in the travel industry. The total capital of the family is, according to Quote magazine, around 9.2 billion euros. The wealth of Fentener van Vlissingen was calculated to be €1.6 billion in Quote 500.

Of the three brothers (Frits, who died in March 2006, and Paul, who died in August 2006) John Fentener van Vlissingen's career was not with the family company, SHV Holdings. He began his own company, BCD Holdings N.V., a market leader in the travel industry. 

BCD Holdings began as a real estate company in 1975 as Property Management Advisory Services. In 1976, the company was renamed NORO since the name NIRO was already appropriated. In 1986 BCD was founded, after the separation of Noro management advisories and investments by the establishment of BCD. In 1987, WorldTravel Advisors was purchased. In 1999, WorldTravel Advisors merged with BTI Americas to form WorldTravel BTI. In 2006, WorldTravel BTI was renamed BCD Travel with the takeover of the German company, TQ3, and the dissolution of the BTI brand, thus creating the third largest travel company in the United States.

In 2014 there were some fake rumours of him buying the English premiership team Aston Villa which in an interview with English paper The Times described the rumours "as complete nonsense." http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/business/industries/leisure/article4324644.ece He is also quoted to have told Dutch media that he "can state now that I have no interest in any sporting ventures, I am enjoying other ventures at this moment in time." http://www.ealuxe.com/richest-people-in-netherlands-top-10/2/ However recently he has been linked with a takeover of English side West Bromwich Albion with some fans claiming to have seen him in attendance of their clash with Manchester City on the opening day of the season. 

See also

	 BCD Travel


