
#Article: John Boozman
#Type: regular article

John Nichols Boozman (; born December 10, 1950) is the senior United States Senator for Arkansas (since 2015). A member of the Republican Party, he previously served as the United States Representative for  (2001-2011).

Born in Shreveport, Louisiana, he was the brother of state Senator Fay Boozman. He attended the University of Arkansas, where he played football for the Arkansas Razorbacks, and graduated from the Southern College of Optometry. He co-founded a private optometry clinic in 1977 and worked as a volunteer optometrist for low-income families. He won a special election in 2002 to the United States House of Representatives, where he served as assistant majority whip and sat on the Republican Policy Committee. He was an advocate for drug policy issues and chaired the Veteran Affairs Economic Opportunity Subcommittee, where he led the passage of bills expanding services for unemployed veterans.

Boozman was elected to the United States Senate in 2010, defeating Democratic incumbent Blanche Lincoln by a 21-point margin and becoming the first Republican to be elected to the seat since Reconstruction. He took office in January 2011 and is the ranking Republican on the Senate Agriculture Subcommittee on Conservation, Forestry and Natural Resources, the Commerce Subcommittee on Science and Space and the Environment and Public Works Subcommittee on Green Jobs and the New Economy. Boozman became the senior Senator in 2015 when Mark Pryor left the Senate after his defeat.

Early life, education and career

Boozman was born in Shreveport, Louisiana, the son of Marie E. (née Nichols) and Fay Winford Boozman, Jr. (1923-1991).  Boozman's father, whose last address was in Rogers, Arkansas, was a Master Sergeant in the United States Air Force. His elder brother Fay (1946-2005) also was a politician. After graduating from Northside High School in Fort Smith, Arkansas, Boozman played football for the Arkansas Razorbacks at the University of Arkansas, which he attended between 1969 and 1973, while completing his pre-optometry requirements. He did not graduate from the University of Arkansas.  He graduated from the Southern College of Optometry in 1977 and entered private practice that same year as co-founder of Boozman-Hof Regional Eye Clinic in Rogers, which has become a major provider of eye care to Northwest Arkansas. He established the low vision program at the Arkansas School for the Blind in Little Rock and worked as a volunteer optometrist at an area clinic that provides medical services to low-income families.

Prior to his election to Congress, Boozman served two terms on the Rogers Public School Board, which governs one of the largest school districts in Arkansas.

U.S. House of Representatives

Elections

Boozman was elected to Congress in a special election after his predecessor, Asa Hutchinson, resigned to become the head of the Drug Enforcement Administration. Boozman was unopposed in 2002, defeated Democratic State Representative Jan Judy by a margin of 59 percent to 38 percent in 2004, and again won re-election in 2006, defeating Democrat Woodrow Anderson III. He was unopposed for reelection in 2008.

Tenure

In October 2002, Boozman voted in favor of the Iraq Resolution which led to the Iraq War.

Starting during the 108th Congress, Boozman served as an Assistant Whip, making him responsible for helping House Republican Whips Roy Blunt and Eric Cantor secure the votes for or against major legislation. Boozman was also named to the Speaker's Task Force for a Drug-Free America in 2003. The task force advised House Speaker Dennis Hastert on major drug policy issues and helped author comprehensive legislative solutions to illegal drug problems, including anti-methamphetamine legislation. Boozman was the lead author of the Stop Marketing Illegal Drugs to Minors Act, a bill that would increase penalties on criminals who design and market drugs, such as candy-flavored meth, that are targeted to kids. Boozman was praised by the National Association of Drug Court Professionals, earning the organization's Congressional Leadership Award in 2009. In 2006, Congress passed a Boozman-authored provision promoting an expanded role for Drug Courts in efforts to reduce drug abuse and recidivism. During the 2008 presidential campaign, like most Arkansas Republicans, Boozman endorsed former Governor of Arkansas Mike Huckabee for President.

In the 109th Congress, he served as Chairman of the Veterans Affairs Economic Opportunity Subcommittee, which focuses on ensuring veterans have a smooth transition to civilian life. He has since served continuously as the Ranking Member on this Subcommittee. Boozman has used his seat on the Veterans Affairs Committee to pass critical legislation honoring the service and sacrifice of United States Military Veterans and increasing benefits to them and their families. In the 111th Congress, Boozman has introduced and the House of Representatives has passed the Veterans Retraining Act of 2009, which provides resources and training opportunities for unemployed veterans. The House of Representatives also passed several other Boozman-authored bills, including a bill that creates grants to help disabled veterans adapt their homes and vehicles to meet their unique needs.

In May 2004, Boozman was appointed to the House Policy Committee, the committee of key Republicans who vet issues and formulate legislation to address them.

Boozman was also a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Parliamentary Assembly (NATO PA), which is an inter-parliamentary organization of legislators from the 19 member countries of NATO and 20 associate countries. He was also appointed vice-chairman of the British American Parliamentary Group, a group of American and British lawmakers who meet to discuss issues of concern and fortify the already strong alliance between the two nations.

Boozman was a member of numerous House caucuses including the Congressional Caucus to Fight & Control Methamphetamine, the National Guard & Reserve Components Caucus, the Congressional Rural Caucus and the Congressional Sportsman's Caucus. Boozman was also one of the founding members of the Congressional I-49 Caucus to promote completion of Interstate 49 and he was the chairman of the Congressional Caucus on the Ivory Coast and West Africa Caucuses.

Congress.org's power rankings rate Boozman's power rating at 7.31, making him the 386th most powerful member out of 435. Congress.org's power rankings for members of the Minority Party fell significantly when Speaker Nancy Pelosi and the House Democrats retook the House of Representatives in 2006.

According to the April 28, 2007 Washington Post, Boozman was told by officials in the White House about its intention to fire Bud Cummins, United States Attorney for the Eastern District of Arkansas, and replace him with Tim Griffin, an aide to Karl Rove. According to the Post, none of the Democrats in Arkansas' congressional delegation were told that Cummins was to be one of eight U.S. Attorneys to be fired. Although Boozman did not represent any counties in the Eastern District, he was informed because he was the only Republican in the state's congressional delegation.

Boozman told the Post and the Associated Press that White House officials had promised him that Griffin would be subject to Senate confirmation. Instead, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales appointed Griffin as interim U.S. Attorney, using a provision of the Patriot Act that has since been repealed due to the controversy. Boozman also said that he didn't think Cummins should have been fired because he was "very well respected and has served the president well."

U.S. Senate

2010 election

Boozman decided to retire from the lower chamber to run for the United States Senate election in Arkansas, 2010 for the seat held by incumbent Democrat Blanche Lincoln. He won the May 2010 Republican primary and then defeated Lincoln in the general election while winning nearly 58% of the vote.

Tenure

Boozman began his term in the Senate in January 2011.

Committee assignments

	Current

	 Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry (2011-present)

	 Subcommittee on Commodities, Markets, Trade and Risk Management

	 Subcommittee on Conservation, Forestry and Natural Resources (Ranking member)

	 Subcommittee on Jobs, Rural Economic Growth and Energy Innovation

	 Subcommittee on Livestock, Dairy, Poultry, Marketing and Agriculture Security

	 Committee on Appropriations (2013-present)

	 Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies

	 Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies

	 Subcommittee on Legislative Branch

	 Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies

	 Committee on Environment and Public Works (2011-present)

	 Subcommittee on Clean Air and Nuclear Safety

	 Subcommittee on Oversight

	 Subcommittee on Water and Wildlife (Ranking member)

	 Committee on Veterans' Affairs (2011-present)

	Previous

	 Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation (2011-2013)

	 Subcommittee on Aviation Operations, Safety, and Security

	 Subcommittee on Communications, Technology, and the Internet

	 Subcommittee on Competitiveness, Innovation, and Export Promotion

	 Subcommittee on Consumer Protection, Product Safety, and Insurance

	 Subcommittee on Oceans, Atmosphere, Fisheries, and Coast Guard

	 Subcommittee on Science and Space (Ranking member)

	 Subcommittee on Surface Transportation and Merchant Marine Infrastructure, Safety, and Security

Source: United States Senate

Caucus memberships

	 International Conservation Caucus

	 National Guard Caucus

	 National Hunger Caucus (Co-Chair)

	 Republican Doctors Caucus 

	 Sportsmen's Caucus

Political positions and votes

As an optometrist, Boozman has taken a strong interest in eye health issues. Boozman saw firsthand the damage done by misuse of unregulated decorative contact lenses. As a result, Boozman led a bi-partisan effort to pass legislation requiring the FDA to improve safety by regulating non-corrective colored contact lenses as medical devices. This legislation was signed into law by President Bush in 2005.

As a former Public School Board Member, Boozman has a strong interest in education policy. In the 111th Congress, he introduced legislation (H.R. 2230) to provide tax credits for teachers and principals who work in challenging, low-income schools.  Boozman has also introduced legislation to reform the No Child Left Behind Act. One bill (H.R. 2229) would give states the latitude they need to adopt alternate and modified standards for children with disabilities.  Boozman stated that this legislation "preserves accountability and helps to ensure our good schools stop ending up on the 'Needs-Improvement List'."

Other Boozman bills include legislation to provide a tax credit for volunteer firefighters, a bill to provide for parental notification and intervention when a minor seeks an abortion, and a bill to create alternatives to traditional foreign aid to poor countries in sub-saharan Africa.

The Zionist Organization of America has praised Boozman for his call to stop federal aid toward Hamas.

Arkansas history

Boozman has worked to honor and preserve the historical record of the role Arkansas played in the westward expansion and development of the United States. Boozman introduced legislation in the 110th Congress calling for a study of the historic Butterfield Overland Mail Trail for the potential addition to the National Trails System. This legislation passed as part of an omnibus bill (P.L. 111-11), and was signed by President Obama on March 30, 2009.

In addition to preserving the historical significance of the Butterfield Trail, Boozman assisted the effort to secure the home of the U.S. Marshals Museum in Fort Smith. Boozman worked with the Fort Smith Marshals Museum Steering Committee, the Western District U.S. Marshals Office to “Bring It Home.” In January 2007 it was announced that Fort Smith would be the permanent home of the U.S. Marshals Museum. In the 111th Congress, Boozman introduced legislation to recognize the 225th Anniversary of the U.S. Marshals Service with a commemorative coin to be minted in 2014.

Among other legislative achievements, Boozman has penned three bills, each enacted into law, to name certain U.S. Post Offices in Arkansas.  In particular, the Harrison Post Office was named after former Arkansas Congressman John Paul Hammerschmidt. In his remarks on the Hammerschmidt Bill (H.R. 4811), Boozman stated that "no one understands my congressional district like the kind and thoughtful gentleman who represented much of Arkansas in the Congress from 1967 through 1993. I consider John Paul Hammerschmidt a mentor and a friend. During his 26 years in Congress, John Paul became known for his strong work ethic and attention to individual constituent service. His fellow Members came to rely on his legislative expertise in highways, aviation and waterway infrastructure" and other issues, such as the needs of veterans.

Health care reform

Boozman, an optometrist and a member of the Doctors Caucus, voted against the House-passed comprehensive health care reform bill on November 7, 2009. Boozman issued the following statement that same day: "I am for health care reform, unfortunately, this bill does more harm than good. The American people deserve health care reform that gives them access to quality and affordable health care and allows them to make decisions that are best for the care they need. Instead of increasing taxes, entitlement programs and red tape to reform health care we need to let families and businesses buy health insurance across state lines; allow small businesses to pool together to buy health insurance at lower prices and end lawsuits that contribute to escalating costs because of doctors being forced to practice defensive medicine.”  Throughout the debate, Boozman has pointed to Medicare cuts, including cuts to Medicare Advantage, increased taxes on health insurance and innovations, and anti-abortion concerns.

Gun laws

In April 2013, Senator Boozman was one of forty-six senators to vote against the passing of a bill which would have expanded background checks for all gun buyers. Boozman voted with 40 Republicans and 5 Democrats to stop the bill. Many newspapers predicted that Boozman would vote Nay based on his prior statements and conservative home state of Arkansas.

Employment discrimination

In November 2013, Senator Boozman was one of thirty-two senators (all Republican) to vote against the Employment Non-Discrimination Act, a bill prohibiting discrimination of individuals in organizations of 15 or more employees, based on sexual orientation or gender identity.

Electoral history

U.S. House of Representatives

U.S. Senate

Personal life

Boozman lives in Rogers with his wife, the former Cathy Marley, and the couple has three daughters. He has successfully raised Polled Hereford cattle that were competitive in the show ring, as well as in bull testing at Oklahoma State University. The Boozman family was active in the 4-H program.

On April 22, 2014, Sen. Boozman successfully underwent emergency heart surgery. He is expected to make a full recovery.


