
#Article: Jerry McNerney
#Type: regular article

Gerald M. "Jerry" McNerney (born June 18, 1951) is an engineer, energy specialist, and the U.S. Representative for , serving in Congress since 2007. He is a member of the Democratic Party. The district, numbered as the 11th District until 2013, is based in Stockton and includes parts of San Joaquin County, East Contra Costa County, and southern Sacramento County.

McNerney holds a Ph.D in mathematics.

Early life, education, and business career

McNerney was born in Albuquerque, New Mexico, the son of Rosemary (née Tischhauser) and Col. John E. McNerney. He is of Swiss and Irish descent. He attended St. Joseph's Military Academy in Hays, Kansas, and, for two years, the United States Military Academy at West Point. After leaving West Point in 1971 in protest of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War, he enrolled at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque, where he received bachelor's and master's degrees and, in 1981, a Ph.D. in Mathematics, with a doctoral dissertation in differential geometry.

McNerney served several years as a contractor to Sandia National Laboratories at Kirtland Air Force Base on national security programs. In 1985, he accepted a senior engineering position with U.S. Windpower (Kenetech). In 1994, he began working as an energy consultant for PG&E, FloWind, The Electric Power Research Institute, and other utility companies. Before being elected to Congress, Jerry served as the CEO of a 2004 start-up company manufacturing wind turbines, named HAWT Power (Horizontal Axis Wind Turbine Power). A 1992 article that he co-authored in an IEEE journal is a good example of his writings during this period.

U.S. House of Representatives

Elections

	2004

McNerney first ran for Congress against Richard Pombo in California's 11th congressional district in the 2004 House elections. He entered the race two weeks before the primary election as a write-in candidate. He qualified to be a write-in candidate for the March 2004 primary by one signature. Having no primary opponent, he won the primary and qualified for the November general election ballot as the Democratic nominee. He lost the general election, 61%-39%. 

	2006

McNerney launched his 2006 campaign early in the fall of 2005. In June 2006 he won the Democratic primary with 52.8% of the vote, defeating Steve Filson, who had been endorsed by the DCCC, and Stevan Thomas. 

In late July, Republicans Pete McCloskey and Tom Benigno (both of whom ran in the Republican primary against Pombo) endorsed McNerney. In September, analysis of the campaign was changed from "Republican safe" to "Republican favored" due to the emergence of McNerney's campaign. The report noted "a GOP party spokesman says it's because they want to win decisively but others speculate that internal polling has delivered bad news for the incumbent." On October 3, 2006, a poll commissioned by Defenders of Wildlife Action Fund was released with McNerney leading Pombo 48 percent to 46 percent. Based on these events, in early October, CQPolitics.com changed their rating of this race from Republican Favored to Leans Republican

On November 7, 2006, McNerney defeated Pombo 53-47%. 

	2008

McNerney won re-election 55% to 45% over Republican nominee Dean Andal.

	2010

McNerney won re-election 48-47%, defeating Republican nominee David Harmer.

	2012

For his first three terms, McNerney represented a district that encompassed eastern Alameda County, most of San Joaquin County and a small portion of Santa Clara County. After redistricting, his district was renumbered as the 9th District. It lost its portion of Alameda County, including McNerney's home in Pleasanton, while picking up part of Sacramento County. After the new map was announced, McNerney announced he would move to San Joaquin County in the new 9th. Although the new district is somewhat more Democratic than its predecessor, it is influenced by the Central Valley. He eventually bought a home in Stockton. He won re-election 56-44%, defeating Republican nominee Ricky Gill.

Tenure

	Veterans

In 2010, President Obama signed into law a bill written by McNerney which improves care of returning service members with traumatic brain injuries (TBI) by establishing an evaluation panel to assess the Veteran's Administration treatments for TBI and recommend improvements. He also wrote a bill in 2013 that allowed veterans to keep receiving their benefits during the government shutdown.

McNerney was one of the first lawmakers to call for the resignation of VA Secretary Eric Shinseki following revelations in the news media about delays in care at VA health care facilities.

	Energy

McNerney is a proponent of renewable energy. He voted to reduce carbon emissions. He has voted for tax incentives for renewable energy and for allowing states to impose stricter emissions standards. He opposes drilling in the Outer Continental Shelf.

McNerney co-sponsored the bill To require the Secretary of Energy to prepare a report on the impact of thermal insulation on both energy and water use for potable hot water (H.R. 4801; 113th Congress), would require the United States Secretary of Energy to prepare a report on the effects that thermal insulation has on both energy consumption and systems for providing potable water in . McNerney said that "it is important for us to look for ways to save taxpayer money and ensure the federal government is doing its part to preserve our natural resources." McNerney argued it would be a good way to collect data so that "we can use the findings from this study and make sure we are doing everything we can in both federal and private buildings to maximize energy and water efficiency."

	Drug legislation

In 2007, McNerney voted against legislation that would have prevented the DEA from enforcing prohibition in the twelve states (including California) which allow the use of marijuana for medical purposes.

In 2013, McNerney introduced the Methamphetamine Education, Treatment and Hope (METH) Act to modernize and expand programs that combat methamphetamine abuse by expanding treatment for addicts, particularly mothers or pregnant women, and provide grants to provide substance abuse and mental health services in rural areas.

	Other issues

McNerney voted in favor of legislation allowing employees to form unions by signing cards authorizing union representation. In 2009, McNerney voted for the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. He has opposed free trade agreements, voting against CAFTA, GATT, and the U.S.-Peru free trade agreement.

Committee assignments

	 Committee on Energy and Commerce

	 Subcommittee on Energy and Power

	 Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing and Trade

	 Subcommittee on Environment and Economy

Caucus memberships

	 Congressional Arthritis Caucus

	 International Conservation Caucus

	 Veteran's Mental Health Caucus

	 Grid Innovation Caucus

Electoral history

Personal life

McNerney resides in Stockton, California. He and his wife, Mary, have been married for nearly forty years and have three children. 


