
#Article: Laura Brod
#Type: regular article

Laura Brod née Morris (born December 11, 1971) is a Minnesota politician, a member of the University of Minnesota Board of Regents, and a former member of the Minnesota House of Representatives who represented District 25A, which includes portions of Le Sueur, Scott and Sibley counties in the south central part of the state.

Background and education

Brod graduated from New Prague High School in New Prague, and continues to live in that community. She received her B.A. in Geography and Russian Area Studies summa cum laude from the University of Minnesota, and later attended Minnesota State University in Mankato, earning her M.A. in Urban and Regional Studies. A small business owner, she served on the New Prague City Council from 1999-2002. She married her husband, Wade, in 1994.

Service in the Minnesota House

A Republican, Brod was first elected to the House in 2002, and was re-elected in 2004, 2006 and 2008. She was a member of the House Finance Committee, the Health Care and Human Services Policy and Oversight Committee, and the Taxes Committee. She also served on the Finance Subcommittee for the Health Care and Human Services Finance Division. She served as an assistant majority leader in 2006, and as an assistant minority leader during the 2007-2008 biennium. On May 4, 2010, she announced that she would not seek a fifth term, stating that it was her belief "that the time for others to serve in the Legislature for our district has come, and my time to find other challenges and ways to contribute is upon me.”

University of Minnesota regent

Brod and former Minnesota House Speaker Steve Sviggum were elected to the University of Minnesota's Board of Regents on February 21, 2011, by a joint meeting of the Minnesota House and Senate. She serves a six-year term on the 12-member body, which is charged with overseeing the University of Minnesota system.

Gubernatorial considerations

Brod was considered a leading gubernatorial candidate to succeed retiring Gov. Tim Pawlenty, but withdrew from the race due to medical concerns. She has not ruled out running at a later time.


