
#Article: Pervez Khattak
#Type: regular article

Pervez Khan Khattak (پروېز خان خټک ; born 1 January 1950) is a Pakistani politician, currently serving as the Chief Minister of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. He also served as the Irrigation Minister of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and twice Minister of Industries & Labour in the past. Khattak relinquished his elected post as the Secretary General of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf on 25 September to Jahangir Tareen 

Khattak has reformist views on Pakistan's political system, and he prioritised accountability in his own government, increased education enrolment, instituted reforms in the police and security sector, anti-polio campaign  and plans infrastructure projects  such as improving the transportation network  He also planned to revive the local economy by helping to rebuild tourism in the area While for the long term, he plans industrialisation of the economy and a reduction in red tape

Early life and education

Pervez Khattak born to Bacha Khan on 1 January 1950 at village Manki Sharif in Nowshera. He belongs to the Khattak tribe of Pashtuns. Pervez Khattak received his early education at the Aitchison College, Lahore.After doing Senior Cambridge from Aitchison,Khattak went to Gordon College, Rawalpindi for his graduation.He had also worked as political worker of Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP).

Pervez Khattak is father of three sons and two daughters. His eldest son Ishaq Khattak, after completing his education, is managing the company that his grandfather had established before the creation of Pakistan. His other two sons Ibrahim Khan Khattak and Ismail Khan Khattak are receiving education in United Kingdom.

Chief Minister of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa

On 13 May 2013, Chairman PTI, Imran Khan nominated Pervez as the Chief Minister of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, the top post in the province where Imran Khan's Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) is the single largest party with 45 out of 99 seats, the party gained another 10 seats through allocation which increased its total seats to 55. Khattak was elected CM with 4 votes, more than his nearest rival from JUI-F Maulana Luftur Rehman who secured 3 votes. He leads a coalition government with PTI as the leading party while Jamaat-e-Islami and Awami Jamhuri Ittehad Pakistan also a part of it.

	Implementation of "Right to Information" bill in KPK.

	Energy Generation.

	De-politicization of police.

	Online Crime's First Information Report (FIR) System.

	People empowerment & developments.

	Mobile Courts.

	Rehabilitation of drug addicts and IDPs.

	Law Enforcement Capability Enhancements.

	Upgradation of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa electricity distribution system.

	Working on Whistleblower law to be implemented in KPK.

For detail information see,

Relations with the federal government

Straight away after assuming office Khattak declared that he will pursue a non-confrontational approach with the Federal Government which is controlled by Nawaz Sharif, he hopes this détente will create a more stable environment for the KpK government to produce results. However confrontation became inevitable with conflict over direction of the Taliban problem and by October 2013 the provincial government became more independent and assertive from the federal government, threatening to close US Supply lines.

Security and terrorism policy

Khattak favours peace talks with the Taliban, but should they fail he is prepared to look at alternative options  simultaneously, Khattak has set up an anti-terrorism force 

Khattak's government has been combatting drugs smugglers as well, many were arrested in raids across Peshawar  They also defused bombs very often  and imposed curfews in sensitive areas 

Judiciary

Khattak supported the judiciary of his province, rather than confronting it like the previous government. The mobile court is used to dispense justice and mediate between disputes  The courts during his term have completed several achievements in favour of human rights Khattak and the judiciary have common cause in rooting out corruption from the province 

Investigations into corruption

Khattak requested the Supreme Court to take notice of an alleged corruption scandal between the Awami National Party and the US administration in which the ANP accepted US$35 million from US government as alleged by former ANP leader Azam Hoti 

Electricity policy

Khattak has a 10-year hydro electric plan which he will implement across the province  He has also approved energy conservation plans  He's also campaigning to prevent electricity theft in the province which he's ruling 

Healthcare

Aside from anti-polio campaigns, the Khattak administration introduced drives to increase breast cancer awareness 

Security policy

Nonetheless, he takes a hardline against drone strikes, viewing them as extending extremism and has threatened to block NATO supply lines if drone strikes continue and the Federal Government refuses to prevent them  Following 2 November Drone Strike, a day before peace talks were due to start with the Taliban, Khattak affirmed that he would indeed use his power to push for the blocking of NATO supply lines 

See also

	Imran Khan

	Asad Qaiser

	Saleem Jan


