
#Article: Rebecka Belldegrun
#Type: regular article

Rebecka Belldegrun (born 1950), MD, is a Finnish-born American ophthalmologist, businesswoman, and investor.

Early life and education

Belldegrun was born in Helsinki. She received her medical degree from the Sackler School of Medicine at Tel Aviv University, and later completed her Ophthalmic Surgery residency in Israel, and her fellowship in Corneal Surgery at Harvard Medical School.

Career ventures

Intertech Corporation

In 1986, Belldegrun founded Intertech Corporation, a New York-based firm specializing in real estate development and acquisitions. She expanded Intertech’s businesses and holdings to include interests in high-tech, biotechnology, hotel management and manufacturing in the United States, England, Scandinavia, Eastern Europe and Israel. She served as the President of the company until 2003.

BellCo Capital

Belldegrun serves as the CEO and President of BellCo Capital, a Los Angeles-based firm which she founded in 2003. BellCo Capital focuses on finding seed investments and experienced management to early-stage and start-up companies, as well as on leveraged acquisitions of, and growth equity investments in leading middle-market enterprises. The company's business transactions include international private equity investments in retail, consumer products, high-tech, pharmaceutical, biotechnology and real estate. One of BellCo's investments is in BabyFirstTV.

Board memberships

Belldegrun serves as a member of a number of boards, including:

	BabyFirstTV - Director

	Brentwood School - Chairman Emeritus of the Board of Trustees

	LACMA - Trustee

	University of Pennsylvania - Member of the Parents Leadership Committee

	Institute for Strategic Threat Analysis and Response at the University of Pennsylvania - Member of the External Advisory Board

In the past, Belldegrun served as a member of the following boards:

	Columbia University - Member of the Board of Visitors

	Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya - Member of the Board of Trustees

	RAND Corporation - Member of the Board of Advisors 

	USC Center on Public Diplomacy - Member of the Advisory Board

Personal life

Belldegrun is married to Dr. Arie Belldegrun and together they have four children. They reside in Bel Air, an affluent neighborhood in Los Angeles. Their oldest son, Ben Belldegrun, a hedge fund manager, is married to Kelly Bergantz, senior producer for Syco.


