
#Article: Nijazi Ramadani
#Type: regular article

Nijazi Ramadani (Nijazi Ramadani)(Serbo-Croat Cyrillic spelling: Hијаӡи Рамадани), born February 14, 1964 in Inatoc (Kokaj) ("Kokaj"), near Gjilan, was an Albanian poet from Kosovo, novelist, social critic, and literary critic.

Education

He finished his first lessons and high school in Gjilan, where in the Universiteti i Prishtinës in Pristina he finished math and informatics.

He was among the best-known modern representatives of contemporary verse in ("Kosovë") Kosovo

Ramadani is known as a literary creator, where his literary creativity is mainly focused on the treatment of national motives, respectively the topic of patriotism.

Activists - works

He is the author of ten books of literary writing about literature, theater, visual arts and literary criticism, fiction, short stories, novels and drama, journalism and polemical articles he has published reviews, reviews, articles, essays, treatises and articles hulimtimuese engaged in Albanian various magazines and abroad, addressing the various issues to social, cultural and literary Albanian in general . Some of his works have been translated into other languages.

This work with his literary creations appeared in the 80's to the local press, where he published poetries in particular.

During his work, he dealt with all genres of journalistic writings.

He is a teacher, coordinator of artists, creators and journalists, editor leads edition ("Rrjedha"), where he published a number of works, and edited the magazine ("Ushtima e maleve"). And worked subsequently as a reporter for the newspaper ("Epoka e Re") in Pristina / and also he is a member of Kosovo writers Association. He lives and still contributes with his career abilities in Gjilan.

Writer, artists and journalists ~ ("Rrjedha") Gjilan* http://rrjedha.20m.com/index_2.html, Yugoslavia SFRY - in present-day Kosovo) is an Albanian publicist, writer, and mathematician.

Notableworks

	 "Albanian geography" ("Dheshkronjë arbri"), 1995, publisher: Jeta e Re, Prishtina, 

	 "Kosovo and self-determination" ("Kosova dhe vetëvendosja"), 1998, publisher:editing "Rrjedha"(as co-author)

	 "Time image" ("Imazh kohe"), 2008, publishing house Rrjedha, Gjilan, 

	 Other accept of theater("Qasje tjeter në teater"), 2008, editing-(publisher): ("Rrjedha")

	 "Alive image" ("Imazh i gjallë"), drama-comedy 2013, publisher: Rrjedha, Prishtinë(MKRS)

	 Frozen image (Imazh i ngrirë), roman, 2010, publisher: Rrjedha, Prishtina

	 "Kokaj monography 1842-2012" ("Monografia për Kokajt), monography 2012, publisher: ("Rrjedha"), Gjilan,


