
#Article: Jeffrey Bewkes
#Type: regular article

Jeffrey Lawrence Bewkes (born May 25, 1952) is an American media mogul. He has been CEO of Time Warner since January 1, 2008, President since December 2005, and Chairman of the Board since January 1, 2009.

Early life and education

Bewkes was born in Paterson, New Jersey,the middle son of Marjorie Louise (née Klenk) and Eugene Garrett Bewkes, Jr., an executive at Norton Simon. He is of Dutch and German ancestry, was raised in Darien, Connecticut, and is a graduate of Deerfield Academy.

In 1974, he graduated from Yale University with a bachelors degree in philosophy. According to college friend Gary Lucas, a guitarist who went on to collaborate with avant-garde acts like Captain Beefheart, said that at Yale in the early 1970s, he fell in with “lunatic fringe types and free thinkers”. Bill Moseley, another college friend who went on to a career in horror movies like Texas Chainsaw Massacre 2, stated, “I think of him as an artist first and foremost”.

Upon graduation, he "tried his hand at documentary work for NBC News" before going to Stanford University to earn his MBA. He sits on both his alma maters respective advisory boards.  After school, he worked at a Sonoma vineyard winery and then took a job in New York City as a commercial banker in Citibanks shipping lending unit.

Career

Leaving Citibank, he took a job at HBO then a small unit of Time Inc, where he was tasked with convincing hotels to subscribe to HBO and then sales director responsible for the launch of Cinemax. He rose to become CFO in 1986 and President and COO in 1991. In 1995 he became CEO of HBO, in which capacity he tripled company profits and "oversaw a fundamental shift in its content, away from just movies and fights and toward original shows like The Sopranos".

In 2002, he became chairman of Time Warner’s entertainment and networks group. From 2005 to December 2007, he served as the top subordinate to Time Warner Chairman and CEO Dick Parsons. In 2008, Bewkes was selected as Parsons' successor, becoming CEO of Time Warner, and then Board Chair in 2009.

As CEO of Time-Warner, Bewkes oversees HBO, Turner Broadcasting (CNN, TNT, TBS, Cartoon Network), Warner Bros. and New Line Cinema, while he oversaw the company's divestment from AOL, Time Inc., and Time Warner Cable. In January 2006, Bewkes and CBS head Les Moonves helped broker the deal that joined the CBS-owned UPN with The WB to form the CW Network.

On behalf of NYC Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, Bewkes was one of the chairs of Media.NYC.2020, which reviewed the future of the global media industry, the implications for NYC, and suggested actionable next steps for the NYC government.

Personal life

Bewkes, who lives in Greenwich, Connecticut, has been married twice. His first wife was Susan Frank Kelley, a law firm partner specializing in trusts and estates; they had one son. His second wife was Margaret Lowry Brim, a former real estate broker with William B. May Company, who was once a television producer and an aide to ABC president Roone Arledge; they had one son. Brim also had one child from her first marriage. In November 2013, Bewkes and Brim commenced divorce proceedings, which completed in summer 2014.


