
#Article: Grey DeLisle
#Type: regular article

Erin Grey Van Oosbree (born August 24, 1973), known professionally as Grey DeLisle (pronounced De-lyle) and Grey Griffin, is an American voice actress and singer-songwriter. She has done voice acting for numerous animated films, television shows, and video games. Her long-running voice roles include Vicky and Tootie from The Fairly OddParents, Mandy from The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy, Daphne Blake from the Scooby-Doo franchise, Azula from Avatar: The Last Airbender and Kimiko Tohomiko from Xiaolin Showdown.

Biography

DeLisle was born in Fort Ord, California, to truck driver George Van Oosbree and singer Joanna Ruth. She is of Dutch, French, Irish, Mexican and Norwegian descent. Her parents separated when she was young. She has one younger brother. DeLisle's mother became a born-again Pentecostal when she was eleven and she was later raised by her maternal grandmother, Eva Flores, a vocalist who performed with salsa musician Tito Puente. She credits her father's love of country music as the biggest influence on her musical taste. She attended Chula Vista High School in the same graduating class as Mario Lopez. In her late teens, she started singing old gospel tunes, and entered the world of stand-up comedy on the advice of a friend. In her comedy routine, DeLisle imitated voices. Her impressions earned the attention of a casting director and was advised to take up voice acting. At this time, she went back to her musical ambitions but also took classes in voice-overs. She soon began working with talent agent Sandy Schnarr.

One of her most notable roles is that of Daphne Blake. DeLisle first voiced the character in the direct-to-video movie Scooby-Doo and the Cyber Chase, which she inherited from her friend and teacher Mary Kay Bergman following the latter's suicide. In an August 2010 interview, She spoke of Bergman: "It was an interesting turn of events to get to play Daphne, but I'm so glad that I have the role, and I was glad that I was able to carry that on for her. She set the bar very high." What's New Scooby-Doo was the first series to feature DeLisle as Daphne.

Personal life

She married Christopher DeLisle in 1992 at age 19; they divorced in 1993, but she kept his surname for her acting. In 2002, she married Murray Hammond of the country band Old 97's; their courtship and wedding were featured in an episode of A Wedding Story.  She gave birth to their son Jefferson Texas "Tex" Hammond on January 31, 2007. They divorced in 2010. She later met Jared Griffin through Twitter, and they married on June 27, 2012. Their son, Harlan Roy Griffin, was born on August 7, 2014.

Discography

	 Albums

	 The Small Time (2000)

	 Homewrecker (2002)

	 Bootlegger, Vol. 1 (2003)

	 The Graceful Ghost (2004)

	 Iron Flowers (2005)

	 Loggerheads soundtrack (2005)

	 Anchored in Love: A Tribute to June Carter Cash (2007)

	 Singles

	 2006 - "Willie We Have Missed You", song on Beautiful Dreamer: The Songs of Stephen Foster (2006)

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games


