
#Article: Trent Franks
#Type: regular article

Trent Franks (born June 19, 1957) is the U.S. Representative for , serving in Congress since 2003. He is a member of the Republican Party. The district, numbered as the 2nd District from 2003 to 2013, is located in the West Valley portion of the Valley of the Sun and includes Glendale, Surprise, Sun City, Peoria and part of western Phoenix.

Early life, education, and business career

Franks was born in Uravan, Colorado, a company town, the son of Juanita and Edward Taylor Franks. He was born with a cleft lip and palate. After his parents separated, Franks took care of his younger siblings. While his parents took financial responsibility, he overtook the leadership role at home. Franks graduated from Briggsdale High School in Colorado in 1976. After high school, Franks bought a drilling rig and moved to Texas to drill wells with his best friend and his younger brother. He moved to Arizona in 1981, where he continued to drill wells.

In 1987, he completed a course of study at the non-accredited, National Center for Constitutional Studies, formerly known as the Freemen Institute, in Utah. For one year, from 1989 to 1990, he attended the Arizona campus of Ottawa University, based in Ottawa, Kansas. In September 2004, Franks told Franchising World that he had been a small business owner for more than 25 years.

Early political career

Arizona legislature

In 1984, while working as an engineer for an oil and gas royalty-purchasing firm, he began his political career by running for a seat in the Arizona House of Representatives, against incumbent Democrat Glen Davis, an attorney, in District 20 in central Phoenix. Franks, who was a member of the Arizona Right to Life organization and president of the Arizona Christian Action Council, campaigned against abortion and in favor of tougher child abuse laws. He defeated Davis by 155 votes. In the state legislature, Franks served as vice-chairman of the Commerce Committee and Chairman of the House Subcommittee on Child Protection and Family Preservation.

Franks was defeated in his re-election bid in November 1986.

Mecham administration

In January 1987, he was appointed by Republican Governor Evan Mecham to head the Arizona Governor's Office for Children, which is a Cabinet-level division of the Governor's office responsible for overseeing and coordinating state policy and programs for Arizona's children.

In late 1987, Franks founded the Arizona Family Research Institute, a nonprofit organization affiliated with James Dobson's Focus on the Family. He was the Executive Director of the organization for four and a half years.

In April 1988, after Mecham was impeached and removed from office, Franks and other appointees resigned their positions. Franks had been under investigation following an Associated Press report about his decision to spend nearly $60,000, without getting bids, for a conference at a former campaign contributor's hotel. Later in 1988, Franks ran again for a legislative seat, moving to District 18 shortly before the filing deadline. He was successful in the Republican primary but lost in the November general election.

Political activism

In 1992, when Franks was chairman of Arizonans for Common Sense, one of the organization's efforts was a constitutional amendment on the November 1992 ballot in Arizona that banned most abortions. The initiative lost, getting about 35 percent of the votes cast.

In August 1995, Arizonans for an Empowered Future, of which Franks was chairman, launched an initiative campaign to amend the state constitution, replacing the graduated state income tax with a flat 3.5 percent rate, and allowing parents to deduct the costs of private-school tuition. The initiative was not one of those appearing on the ballot in 1996.

Franks worked for and later became president of Liberty Petroleum Corporation, a small oil exploration company established in 1996. Franks served as a consultant to conservative activist Pat Buchanan's presidential campaign.

U.S. House of Representatives

Elections

	1994

Franks ran for  in 1994, after incumbent U.S. Representative Jon Kyl decided to run for the U.S. Senate. He lost to John Shadegg, 43%-30%.

	2002

Following the 2000 Census, Arizona got two additional seats. Franks decided to run in the newly redrawn Arizona's 2nd congressional district. The district, which had previously been the 3rd district, had come open after 13-term incumbent Bob Stump had announced his retirement. The initial favorite in the race was Lisa Jackson Atkins, Stump's longtime chief of staff, whom Stump had endorsed as his successor. Atkins had long been very visible in the district (in contrast to her more low-key boss) to the point that many thought she was the district's representative. Franks narrowly defeated Atkins in the seven-candidate Republican primary, 28%-26%, a difference of just 797 votes. He won the November 2002 general election, defeating Democrat Randy Camacho, 60%-37%.

	2004

Franks faced unusually strong competition in the Republican primary from the more moderate businessman Rick Murphy. Franks defeated him 64%-36%. He won re-election to a second term, by defeating Camacho in a rematch, 59%-38%.

	2006

He won re-election to a third term with 59% of the vote.

	2008

He won re-election to a fourth term with 59% of the vote.

	2010

Franks was again challenged in the Republican primary. However, he easily defeated Charles Black, 81%-19%. He won re-election to a fifth term with 65% of the vote.

	2012

For his first five terms, Franks represented a vast district encompassing most of northwestern Arizona, though the bulk of its population was in the West Valley. It appeared to be gerrymandered because of a narrow tendril connecting the Hopi reservation to the rest of the district. However, due to longstanding disputes between the Hopi and Navajo, it had long been believed the two tribes should be in separate districts.

However, after the 2010 census, Franks' district was renumbered as the 8th District, and reduced to essentially the Maricopa County portion of his old district. As evidence of how much the West Valley dominated the old 2nd, Franks retained 92% of his former constituents, even as he lost 85% of his old district's land. He was challenged in the Republican primary by Tony Passalacqua, whom Franks defeated easily, 83%-17%. The new 8th was no less Republican than the old 2nd, and Franks won a sixth term with 63% of the vote.

	2014

Franks won his party's election in the Republican primary on August 26, 2014.

Positions

The National Journal has ranked Franks among the "most conservative" members of the U.S. House of Representatives in 2009. He is a member of the Republican Study Committee. Franks has also been active with Operation Smile.

Online gaming

Franks is a staunch advocate of a federal prohibition of online poker. In 2006, he cosponsored H.R. 4411, the Goodlatte-Leach Internet Gambling Prohibition Act and H.R. 4777, the Internet Gambling Prohibition Act.

Homeland security

On October 14, 2009, Franks joined with three fellow Representatives in calling for the investigation of the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR) over allegations of trying to plant "spies," based on a CAIR memo indicating that they "will develop national initiatives such as Lobby Day, and placing Muslim interns in Congressional offices." The request followed publication of the book Muslim Mafia. Representative Sue Myrick had written the foreword, which characterized CAIR as subversive and aligned with terrorists.  CAIR has countered that these initiatives are extensively used by all advocacy groups and accused Franks and his colleagues of intending to intimidate American Muslims who "take part in the political process and exercise their rights."

Taxes

Franks is a signer of the Taxpayer Protection Pledge. In 2010, Franks voted against the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.He has high approval ratings from the Small Business and Entrepreneurship Council.  In November 2011, he voted to pass H.R. 2930, which authorizes crowdfunding for small businesses.

In 2009 Franks signed a pledge sponsored by Americans for Prosperity promising to vote against any Global Warming legislation that would raise taxes.

Criticism of the Obama Administration

He opposes the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, claiming “the thought of Americans' health care decisions being put into the hands of an unimaginably large bureaucracy is a frightening prospect.” He is not supported by American Public Health Association or the Children's Health Fund.

In September 2009, he stirred controversy when criticizing President Barack Obama. He said "Obama's first act as president of any consequence, in the middle of a financial meltdown, was to send taxpayers' money overseas to pay for the killing of unborn children in other countries. Now, I got to tell you, if a president will do that, there's almost nothing that you should be surprised at after that. We shouldn't be shocked that he does all these other insane things. A president that has lost his way that badly, that has no ability to see the image of God in these little fellow human beings, if he can't do that right, then he has no place in any station of government and we need to realize that he is an enemy of humanity."

Abortion

In a 2010 interview, discussing the legacy of slavery which Franks described as a "crushing mark on America's soul", the congressman said, "Half of all black children are aborted. Far more of the African American community is being devastated by the policies of today than were being devastated by the policies of slavery."

In June 2013, he proposed a bill that would ban abortions after 20 weeks without exceptions for rape and incest. In defense, he stirred controversy when saying that “the incidents of rape resulting in pregnancy are very low." He later clarified, "Pregnancies from rape that result in abortion after the beginning of the sixth month are very rare."  The bill passed by a vote of 228-196.

Franks presided over a hearing to ban abortions in the District of Columbia, in which he did not allow D.C.'s lone delegate and Member of Congress, Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton, to testify. In doing so, he said Congress has the authority to “exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever” in the District, even though the heavily Democratic district is strongly opposed to the ban.

Franks has also been involved in the founding of a crisis pregnancy center in Tempe, Arizona, that's still in operation today. In the past, Franks has picketed abortion clinics but has ceased to do so stating in a June 2013 interview that "It became clear to me that I could be more effective by trying to do something to light a candle rather than curse the darkness."

Other

During the 2008 campaign, Franks stated that he is skeptical about global warming.

He opposes same-sex marriage and abortion.

Franks supports the right to bear firearms. The interest group, Gun Owners of America, have given Franks high approval ratings. In 2011, he voted to pass the National Right-to-Carry Reciprocity Act.

Committee assignments

	 Committee on Armed Services

	 Subcommittee on Strategic Forces

	 Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities

	 Committee on the Judiciary

	 Subcommittee on Courts, Commercial and Administrative Law

	 Subcommittee on the Constitution (Chairman)

Caucus memberships

	 DUI Caucus

	 Congressional Hispanic Conference

	 Education Freedom Caucus

	 Human Rights Caucus

	 India Caucus

	 Israel Allies Caucus

	 International Religious Freedom Caucus

	 Liberty Caucus

	 Tea Party Caucus

	 Working Group on Judicial Accountability

	 Working Group on Waste, Fraud and Abuse

Legislation sponsored

	 On April 9, 2013, Franks introduced the Keep the Promise Act of 2013 (H.R. 1410; 113th Congress).  If enacted, the bill would prevent the Arizona Native American tribe Tohono O'odham from building a planned casino in the Phoenix metropolitan area.

Electoral history

Personal life

Franks and his wife, Josephine, have been married since 1980; they are members of a Baptist Church, specifically the North Phoenix Baptist Church.  In August 2008, a donor egg and surrogate were used to give birth to their twins, Joshua Lane and Emily Grace.

Franks is a past chairman of the Children's Hope Scholarship Foundation.


