
#Article: Manohar Parrikar
#Type: regular article

Manohar Gopalkrishna Prabhu Parrikar (born 13 December 1955) is an Indian politician from the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the incumbent Defence Minister of India. Before being inducted into the Council of Ministers of the Union Government on 9 November 2014, he was Chief Minister of Goa, first from 2000 to 2005 (Goa's first BJP chief minister), and later from March 2012 to November 2014. He was succeeded by Laxmikant Parsekar as Goa's CM. Parrikar had represented the Panaji constituency in the Legislative Assembly of Goa when he was a player in the state politics.

Personal life

Manohar Parrikar was born in Mapusa, Goa.

He studied at Loyola High School, Margao. He completed his secondary education in Marathi and went on to graduate in metallurgical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay (IIT Bombay) in 1978. He is the first IIT graduate to serve as Chief Minister of an Indian state. He was awarded the Distinguished Alumnus Award in 2001 by IIT Bombay. Manohar Parrikar and Nandan Nilekani, former Chairman of the new Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI), graduated together from IIT Bombay in the year 1978.

His wife Medha Parrikar died of cancer in 2000. He has two sons.

Political career

Parrikar joined the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) at a young age and became a mukhya shikshak (chief instructor) in the final years of his schooling. After graduating from IIT, he resumed RSS work in Mapusa while maintaining a private business, and became a sanghchalak (local director) at the age of 26. He was active in the RSS's North Goa unit, becoming a key organiser of the Ram Janmabhoomi movement. He was seconded by RSS to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) with the objective of fighting the Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party.Parrikar has often expressed considerable pride of his RSS background, saying that he learnt "discipline, progressiveness, gender equality, equality of all before the law, nationalism and social responsibility from the RSS".He is sometimes described incorrectly as having been a pracharak of the RSS.

As a member of the BJP, Parrikar was elected to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa in 1994. He was leader of the opposition from June to November 1999. He successfully contested the election to become Chief Minister of Goa for the first time on 24 October 2000, but his tenure would last only till 27 February 2002. On 5 June 2002, he was re-elected and would serve another term as Chief Minister.

On 29 January 2005, his government was reduced to a minority in the Assembly after four BJP MLAs resigned from the House. Pratapsinh Rane of the Indian National Congress would subsequently replace Parrikar as Chief Minister. In 2007, the Parrikar-led BJP was defeated in the Goa state elections by the Indian National Congress led by Digambar Kamat. His party became victorious once again after the BJP and their pary-allies won twenty-four seats against the Indian National Congress' nine in the Goa Assembly Elections held in March 2012. The BJP showed an impressive performance in the 2014 General Elections, winning both Lok Sabha seats in Goa. The Archbishop is said to have played a crucial role in bringing the BJP to power in the March 2012 assembly election, at a time when the minority community was against the saffron party. The BJP, under Parrikar, which was known as an ‘anti-minority’ party before the assembly election, slowly started gaining confidence of this section, which constitutes almost 26.7 percent of the State population.

Manohar Parrikar was reluctant to leave Goa and move to Delhi in November of 2014, by his own admission. The relationship between the Archbishop and by then former Chief minister Parrikar was such that Parrikar had sought the blessings of Goa's Archbishop Filipe Neri before leaving to take up his assignment as Defense Minister, in New Delhi. But Prime Minister Narendra Modi had high regard for Parrikar's abilities and persuaded him to join the Central Government. 

Parrikar was sworn-in as Cabinet Minister for Defense in November of 2014 during what would be the first expansion of Modi's ministerial council, and his entry into the parliament was facilitated by choosing him as the party's candidate for the elected Rajya Sabha from Uttar Pradesh.

Controversies

Hindutva education

In 2001, Parrikar government turned over fifty-one government primary schools in rural areas to Vidya Bharati, the educational wing of the Sangh Parivar, inviting criticism from certain educationists.

Italy, Germany and Austria garbage tour junket

Months before Goa’s lawmakers booked themselves on a taxpayer-funded junket to the World Cup in Brazil to study traffic management, another batch of elected representatives had gone to Venice, among other European cities, to study garbage systems.

The 20-person delegation went to Italy, Germany and Austria in November to observe garbage management practices. Led by deputy chief minister Francisco D’Souza, the team included MLAs, panchayat members and as well as members of municipal councils. It cost the state exchequer about Rs 1 crore.

FIFA World Cup junket

Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar approved a Rs 89-lakh junket for six of his MLAs, including three ministers, to attend the FIFA World Cup in Brazil.

Awards

	 2012: CNN-IBN Indian of the Year in politics category


