
#Article: Philip W. Noel
#Type: regular article

Philip William Noel (born June 6, 1931) was the 68th Governor of Rhode Island. He was elected in 1972, and re-elected in 1974.

Biography

Philip Noel was born in Warwick, Rhode Island. His parents were Joe Noel, an auto mechanic, and Emma Crudeli Noel, a jewelry worker. He attended public schools in Warwick, then accepted a football scholarship to Georgetown University. he transferred to Brown University when Georgetown dropped its football program. He received a degree in Economics from Brown in 1954, then returned to Georgetown University to study Law, with the goal of joining the FBI. While still in school, he obtained a job from Democratic Rhode Island Senator John O. Pastore in the Senate post office.

After receiving his Law degree, Noel began his professional career as a solo practitioner, with law offices in Providence and Warwick.

Noel married Joyce Anne Sandberg. Sandberg was Miss Rhode Island for 1953 and participated in the 1953 Miss America pageant. She was also Miss Rhode Island USA for 1954 and participated in the 1954 Miss USA pageant. They had five children.

Political career

Encouraged by Senator Pastore, Noel ran for the Warwick city council in 1958. He lost his first campaign, but was elected in 1960, and served three terms. In 1966 he was elected Mayor of Warwick, serving from 1967 to 1973 (three terms). In 1972 he mounted a successful campaign to become Governor of Rhode Island. Senator Pastore announced his retirement from the Senate in late 1975. In January 1976, Noel announced a bid for the Democratic nomination to succeed Pastore.

As governor, Noel sponsored legislation creating the Rhode Island Port Authority with power to take control over Quonset Point, Davisville, and other relinquished U.S. military property. He established the Rhode Island Department of Economic Development. He sponsored legislation which established the Rhode Island Housing and Mortgage Finance Corporation (RIHMFC).

Noel was tasked by President Nixon to travel to China on a diplomatic mission. President Ford appointed Noel to the US Commission on Intergovernmental Relations.

In 1976 Noel was the Acting Chairman of the Platform Committee for that year's Democratic National Convention. He was also the Chairman of the Democratic Governors' Conference.

After an unsuccessful bid for a U.S. Senate seat in 1976, Phil resumed the practice of law in Providence and Washington, became a successful real estate developer, and founded several start-up companies in the petroleum industry, most of them based in Louisiana. In his sunset years, Noel maintained active in various business enterprises including a Warwick marina and country club.

Controversy

In early 1976 Noel was criticized for remarks he made characterizing the conditions of poverty in a "black ghetto". In May he stepped down as chair of the Democratic National Convention's Platform Committee as a response to the controversy over his remarks. Later the same month, he survived a helicopter crash on the University of Rhode Island campus. Noel narrowly lost the September primary election to automobile dealer Richard Lorber. Lorber lost the general election to former United States Secretary of the Navy John Chafee.

After he completed his term as governor, Noel returned to his law practice. As of 2011 he and his wife were living in Estero, Florida, while spending their summers in Rhode Island.

In 2011 Noel was inducted into the Rhode Island Heritage Hall of Fame.


