
#Article: Romesh Ranganathan
#Type: regular article

Romesh Ranganathan (born 30 January 1978) is a British stand-up comedian and actor. He was nominated for Best Newcomer at the 2013 Edinburgh Comedy Awards. In 2015, he was a regular on Play to the Whistle and The Apprentice: You're Fired!.

Career

As mentioned on a 2013 episode of Live at the Apollo (series 9) in which he featured, Ranganathan started performing as a comedian whilst a mathematics teacher at Hazelwick School in Crawley, and The Beacon School, Banstead, Surrey.

Ranganathan started presenting Newsjack on Radio 4 Extra in March 2014.

He appeared on The Great British Bake Off: An Extra Slice in 2014, during which he presented his homemade vegan chocolate brownies. Ranganathan is a vegan, having been a vegetarian up until 2013.

Ranganathan has guested on multiple episodes of 8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown. He has also appeared on Would I Lie to You?, Holby City, Soccer AM, Russell Howard's Good News, Sweat the Small Stuff, The Last Leg, Virtually Famous, Have I Got News for You and Mock the Week. He was a regular contestant on the first series of Taskmaster and also appeared in the third episode of Jon Richardson Grows Up.

In 2015 he presented a series for BBC Three, Asian Provocateur, in which he travelled to Sri Lanka to explore his ancestral country.

He also joined The Apprentice: You're Fired! in 2015 as a regular panellist. The show is a spin-off of from The Apprentice.

Personal life

Ranganathan is married and a father of three. In 2014 Ranganathan's wife, Lisa, was admitted to the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary during The Edinburgh Fringe Festival where Ranganathan was appearing and gave birth to their son.

Prior to his comedy career, he was a freestyle rapper under rap name "Ranga" and once reached the finals of the UK freestyle competition.

Ranganathan taught maths and was head of sixth form at Hazelwick School in Crawley before becoming a professional comedian in 2012. His wife was a drama teacher at Hazelwick.

He is of Sri Lankan Tamil descent and a supporter of Arsenal F.C..

Ranganathan is a vegan.


