
#Article: Brett Dalton
#Type: regular article

Brett Patrick Dalton (born January 7, 1982) is an American actor. He is best known for playing Grant Ward in ABC's series Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D..

Early life

Dalton graduated in 2001 from Westmont High School in Campbell, California, where he became interested in acting after auditioning for a production of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest and where he was California Scholarship Federation President and Associated Student Body President. He played the lead in My Favorite Year. After studying at University of California, Berkeley for his undergraduate degree, Dalton received a Master of Fine Arts from Yale University in 2011. One of his Yale classmates was Oscar winner Lupita Nyong'o.

Career

In November 2012, he was cast in a starring role in the Joss Whedon TV series, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D as Agent Grant Ward. The series takes place in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, following character Agent Phil Coulson and his small team of agents, Dalton's character among them. Dalton's other television credits include Blue Bloods, Army Wives and Nurses (failed pilot for Fox), and National Geographic Channel's Killing Lincoln, a Tony and Ridley Scott Production. His theatre credits include Passion Play, Romeo and Juliet, and Happy Now? (Yale Repertory); Sweet Bird of Youth and Demon Dreams (Williamstown Theatre Festival); Macbeth (Macbeth) and You Can't Take It With You (Chautauqua Theater Company).

On May 16, 2014, Dalton was cast in indie drama film The Tourist, as Eric Lazard, a heartbroken former college football star who gets in over his head with a dangerous Florentine sport and alluring local woman, alongside Stana Katic and Emily Atack.

In 2015, Dalton voiced the character Mike in Until Dawn (2015), an action survival horror video game developed by Supermassive Games and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation 4.

Personal life

Brett lives on the West Coast with his fiancée Melissa Trn and their daughter, Sylvia, who was born in 2012.

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games


