
#Article: Theo Müller
#Type: regular article

Theo Müller (born 1940) is a German heir and businessman, the head of the dairy company Unternehmensgruppe Theo Müller.

Early life

Theo Müller was born in Aretsried, Germany in 1940, the son of Alois Müller.

Career

The Müller company was founded in 1896 by his grandfather Ludwig Müller in Aretsried, Bavaria. In 1938, his father Alois Müller took over. Theo took over in 1971, when the dairy business only had four employees.

Today, apart from the dairy businesses, Theo Müller Group has a packing company (Optipack), logistics (Culina), transportation (Fahrzeugtechnik Aretsried), fruit processing (Muller Naturfarm) and a fish restaurant chain (Nordsee). More recent acquisitions have included companies making chilled salad, sauces and dressings, speciality fish and baked goods.

In 2012, the company purchased Robert Wiseman Dairies, which supplies 30% of the UK's fresh milk market, for £280 million. In November 2014, the company agreed to buy Dairy Crest's milk business for £80 million. Theo Müller commented, "Bringing the two dairy operations together will enhance the merged business's ability to compete and will ensure that customers continue to receive quality products at low prices".

Theo Müller is the sole owner, and as of 2015, Ronald Kers is the new CEO, replacing Heiner Kamps, who retired in 2015. The company now employs more than 20,000 workers.

Personal life

Theo Müller has nine children, seven with his wife Hanna Bittmann, who he divorced in 1995, and two daughters with his partner Ines Hüvel. His eldest son, Stefan Müller, is a board member of Theo Müller Group.

In 1995, Müller survived a kidnapping attempt in which a pistol and electrical-shock equipment was held to his head. He jumped out of the car, and was working again later that afternoon.

He has lived in Erlenbach, near Zurich, Switzerland since 2003. In an interview with Der Spiegel in 2003, Müller explained that he and his children were all moving to Switzerland to avoid having to pay Germany's 30% inheritance tax.


