
#Article: Gregg Harper
#Type: regular article

Gregory "Gregg" Harper (born June 1, 1956) is the U.S. Representative for , serving since 2009. He is a member of the Republican Party. The district includes the wealthier portions of the state capital, Jackson, along with most of that city's suburbs. Other cities in the district include Meridian, Natchez, Starkville, and Brookhaven.

Early life, education and career

Harper was born in Jackson, Mississippi. He spent eight years working as Chairman of the Rankin County, Mississippi Republican Party, and served as a delegate to the 2000 Republican National Convention. He was appointed by the party as an observer during the controversial 2000 Florida presidential recount.

Harper graduated from Mississippi College in 1978 with a degree in Chemistry and from the University of Mississippi School of Law in 1981. He has worked as a private practice attorney since receiving this degree. He was the prosecuting attorney for the cities of Brandon, Mississippi and Richland, Mississippi.

As for his personal life, he is a deacon of Crossgates Baptist Church in Brandon, Mississippi, where he had also been a Sunday School teacher.

U.S. House of Representatives

Committee assignments

	 Committee on Energy and Commerce

	 Subcommittee on Commerce, Manufacturing and Trade

	 Subcommittee on Environment and Economy

	 Committee on Ethics

	 Committee on House Administration

	 Subcommittee on Elections (Chairman)

Legislation

Harper introduced the Gabriella Miller Kids First Research Act (H.R. 2019; 113th Congress) into the House on May 16, 2013. The bill, which passed in both the House and the Senate, would end taxpayer contributions to the Presidential Election Campaign Fund and divert the money in that fund to pay for research into pediatric cancer through the National Institutes of Health. The total funding for research would come to $126 million over 10 years. As of 2014, the national conventions got about 23% of their funding from the Presidential Election Campaign Fund.

Elections

Gregg Harper won the Republican nomination in Mississippi's 3rd congressional district on April 1, 2008 with 57% of the vote.  This was tantamount to election in this heavily Republican district. He defeated his Democratic opponent, Joel Gill in the November General Election winning 63% of the vote.


