
#Article: John J. Flanagan
#Type: regular article

John J. Flanagan (born May 7, 1961) represents the 2nd District of the New York State Senate, which includes the entire Town of Smithtown and portions of both the Towns of Brookhaven and the Huntington, all located in Suffolk County, New York. Flanagan succeeded his father, John J. Flanagan, Sr., who served in the New York State Assembly from 1973 to 1986, when Flanagan, Jr. was first elected at age 25, serving until 2002, when he was elected to the New York State Senate. On May 11, 2015, Flanagan was elected as Temporary President of the New York State Senate.

Biography

Flanagan was raised in Huntington, New York, and attended Harborfields High School. He graduated from the College of William and Mary in 1983 with a B.A. in Economics. He was a member of the New York State Assembly from 1987 to 2002, sitting in the 187th, 188th, 189th, 190th, 191st, 192nd, 193rd and 194th New York State Legislatures. He received a law degree from Touro Law School in 1990 and was admitted to practice law in New York State in 1991. Flanagan has become involved in state budget issues after having served as the ranking member of the Ways and Means Committee while in the Assembly.

In 2012, Flanagan joined with Assemblywoman Ellen Jaffee announced that the “Breast Density Information” law they jointly sponsored to help improve early detection of breast cancer by informing women of their breast density and encouraging them to discuss with their physicians the potential benefits of additional screening tests.

Flanagan has also sponsored legislation that would ban the sale of salvia divinorum throughout New York State. His efforts to ban the hallucinogen has caused some discussion with opinions on both sides of the issue and is awaiting passage in the New York State Assembly.

Flanagan also has reintroduced his legislation that would ban the elements in synthetic marijuana.

Prior to becoming temporary president and majority leader of the New York State Senate, Flanagan served as the Chairman of the Senate Standing Committee on Education and as a member of the Committees on Codes; Corporations, Authorities and Commissions; Finance; Higher Education; Insurance; Judiciary; Rules and Veterans, Homeland Security and Military Affairs. In 2013, he voted in favor of the NY Safe Act, but since that time has indicated a willingness to reconsider or modify such legislation. In 2011 Flanagan voted against the Marriage Equality Act, which legally recognized same-sex marriages performed in the state, in a closely divided Senate vote of 33-29. Marriage Equality Act roll call

As the Chair of the New York Senate Education Committee, Flanagan held hearings across the state to examine several major issues including state assessments, the implementation of common core state standards and the protection of student privacy. The hearing series was called “The Regents Reform Agenda: ‘Assessing’ Our Progress” and was held in Long Island, Syracuse, Buffalo, New York City and Albany.

Family

Flanagan and his wife Lisa have three children and reside in East Northport, New York.


