
#Article: Sean Reyes
#Type: regular article

Sean D. Reyes is the 21st Attorney General of Utah. He was appointed by Governor Gary Herbert following the resignation of John Swallow. He is a member of the Republican Party and has served as a county, state and national (alternate) delegate for the Republican Party and a member of the State Central Committee, the governing body of the Utah Republican Party.

Early Life and Education

Reyes was raised in Southern California. His father was an immigrant from the Philippines of both Filipino and Spanish descent. He is a nephew of Philippine President Ramon Magsaysay.

Reyes received his bachelor's degree from BYU in 1994 and his law degree from UC Berkeley in 1997.

Law practice

Reyes was a lawyer at Parsons Behle & Latimer. Immediately before being appointed attorney general he was serving as general counsel for Springville, Utah based eTAGz. After his work with PB&L, Reyes formed Reyes Legal Management and was also a partner with venture capital firm Accelerate Ventures.

Reyes has also served on the boards of many non-profit institutions, including one conducting education against fraud. He has also involved with the National Commission on Museum for American Latino.

Reyes also served as a small claims judge for the 3rd District Court of Utah.

Reyes received the first-ever National Outstanding Young Lawyer Award from the American Bar Association.

Politics

Reyes ran for Attorney General of Utah in 2012 against John Swallow. He lost the primary election with a margin of 69 to 32 percent. In December 2013, John Swallow resigned from office. Reyes was then selected as one of three candidates by the GOP State Central Committee on Dec 14, 2013. Governor Gary Herbert appointed Reyes as the next Attorney General of Utah on Dec 23, 2013.

Because of Utah's election laws, Reyes had to run in the Utah elections, 2014 to be elected to finish out the original term of John Swallow. He was the Utah Republican Party candidate, and prevailed with 63.06 percent of the vote over Utah Democratic Party candidate Charles A. Stormont, and Libertarian candidate Andrew Mccullough.

Reyes is the first ethnic minority to become the Attorney General of Utah or to hold statewide office in Utah.

Reyes was appointed by Governor Jon Huntsman, Jr. to serve as one of the youngest members of the Third District Judicial Nominating Commission; he spent several years on a National Congressional Commission started by President George W. Bush. Appointed by Congress and the President of the United States, Reyes conducted public hearings throughout the country to advise the Administration and Congress on Latino issues.

Immediately after taking office, Reyes appealed Judge Robert J. Shelby's ruling that struck down Amendment 3, the state's same-sex marriage ban. The estimated $2 million price tag in appealing Shelby's ruling was criticized The Advocate, Daily Kos, and ThinkProgress. In response, Reyes stated "We're willing to spend whatever it takes to protect the laws and the will of the people" and that "everyone benefits from appealing the case."

Private life

Reyes and his wife Saysha are the parents of six children.

Reyes and his immediate family belong to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). Reyes lists church involvement on his campaign website.


