
#Article: David Bossie
#Type: regular article

David N. Bossie (born November 1, 1965; Boston, Massachusetts) is an American political activist. Since 2000 he has been President and Chairman of conservative advocacy group Citizens United.

Early life

Bossie grew up in Massachusetts to parents he has described as "apolitical". When he first registered to vote he left the political affiliation box blank. When an employee explained to him that it was a requirement for registration in Massachusetts, he said that he wanted to be whatever Ronald Reagan was. The employee said that she wasn't permitted to tell him but gave him a newspaper and said, "Here, read this, figure it out and fill in the appropriate box."

Career

Congressional investigator

After the Republicans won control of the United States House of Representatives in the 1994 elections Dan Burton, (R-IN), became chairman of the House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight. In 1997, he hired Mr. Bossie as chief investigator to look into Clinton campaign finance abuses.  By May 1998, Burton came under intense partisan pressure; even fellow Republicans complained that committee staff had published redacted tapes and transcripts of former United States Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell's prison telephone calls omitting some exculpatory passages. Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich pressed Burton to seek Bossie's resignation. Shortly thereafter, Burton accepted Bossie's resignation.

Citizens United

During his tenure at Citizens United, the organization focused increasingly on producing feature film documentaries through its Citizens United Productions division. Their films have included:

	Border War: The Battle Over Illegal Immigration

	Celsius 41.11

	Rediscovering God in America, hosted by Newt and Callista Gingrich

	Hillary: The Movie

	Occupy Unmasked

Citizens United hoped to begin distribution of the feature film Hillary: The Movie in January or February 2008. But the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 made that an unlawful electioneering communication. They sued, unsuccessfully, for an injunction to prohibit the Federal Election Commission from enforcement of those provisions of BCRA on first amendment grounds.

In a 2010 landmark decision, the Supreme Court decided Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission for Citizens United. For-profit and not-for-profit corporations may now advertise and broadcast messages of a political nature without limits on how much they can spend and with few limits on the timing and nature of the messages.

Citizens United supported Newt Gingrich in the 2012 Iowa caucuses.

Publications

Bossie is the author of The Many Faces of John Kerry, a critical look at presidential candidate Senator John Kerry. He has also written Intelligence Failure, a piece alleging failings on the part of the national security apparatus during the Clinton Administration in the years before September 11, 2001. Bossie is also the author of the 2008 publication Hillary: the Politics of Personal Destruction and co-author of the 2000 release Prince Albert: the Life and Lies of Al Gore with Floyd Brown.

At the Tea Party Convention, Bossie debuted his documentary Generation Zero, focusing on the 2008 financial crisis, and its basis in the selfishness of the Baby Boomer generation.

Awards and honors

Bossie received the Ronald Reagan Award from the Conservative Political Action Conference in 1999.

Personal

Bossie has served for 20 years as a Montgomery County, Maryland volunteer firefighter. He lived in the firehouse for several years before his marriage. He met his wife, Susan, through his political work. As of 2010 they reside in Montgomery County with their four children.

See also

	Citizens United

	Lauch Faircloth

	Dan Burton

	Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission


