
#Article: Rachel Billington
#Type: regular article

Rachel Mary Billington OBE (née Pakenham, born 11 May 1942) is a British author, the daughter of the Earl and Countess of Longford, who were both eminent writers, as was her aunt Christine Longford.

Career

Billington worked in television in London and New York before taking up full-time writing in 1968. She has published twenty-one novels for adults, including the bestsellers A Woman's Age and Bodily Harm. Her most recent novel is Glory (2015), which describes the First World War Gallipoli campaign through the eyes of the participants and their wives and girlfriends at home. She has also written six children's novels, six religious books for children and three non-fiction books, including The Great Umbilical, about mothers and daughters.

She has written plays for BBC Television's Plays for Today series (Don't Be Silly and Life After Death), and several radio plays, and has contributed to film scripts including The Light at the Edge of the World and Interlude.

Billington has also written and continues to write journalism for newspapers in both the UK and the US, including a three-year stint as columnist for the Sunday Telegraph.

Volunteer work

Billington was President of English PEN, the writers' organisation, from 1998 to 2001 and is now Honorary Vice-President. During her time as President Billington initiated PEN's Readers & Writers programme which sends books and writers to meet readers in schools, prisons and other institutions which lack resources.

She is a Trustee of the Longford Trust which was set up in memory of her father, Lord Longford. In 1991 she became a member of the editorial team of Inside Time, the not-for-profit national newspaper for prisoners. She now writes a monthly column. In addition she is a Trustee of the Catholic weekly, The Tablet, and of the Siobhan Dowd Trust, set up to encourage reading among disadvantaged children.

Awards

Billington was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2012 New Year Honours for her services to literature.

Personal life

Billington is married to the film, theatre and television director Kevin Billington. They have four children and five grandchildren, and live in London and in the oldest continuously inhabited house in Dorset.

Books

	 Novels

	 Glory

	 Maria and the Admiral

	 The Missing Boy

	 Lies and Loyalties

	 One Summer

	 The Space Between

	 A Woman's Life

	 Tiger Sky

	 Perfect Happiness

	 Magic and Fate

	 Bodily Harm

	 Theo and Matilda

	 Loving Attitudes

	 The Garish Day

	 Occasion of Sin

	 A Woman's Age

	 A Painted Devil

	 Beautiful

	 Cock Robin

	 Lilacs Out of the Dead Land

	 The Big Dipper

	 All Things Nice

	 Religious books

	 The First Christmas

	 The First Easter

	 The First Miracles

	 The Life of Jesus

	 The Life of Saint Francis

	 Chapters of Gold

	 Non-fiction

	 The Great Umbilical

	 The Family Year

	 Children's books

	 Poppy's Angel

	 Poppy's Hero

	 There's More to Life

	 Far Out!

	 Star Time

	 Rosanna and the Wizard-Robot


