
#Article: Demond Wilson
#Type: regular article

Demond Wilson (born October 13, 1946) is an American actor, author, and pastor. He is best known for his role as Lamont Sanford, in the 1970s NBC sitcom Sanford and Son.

Early life and career

Wilson was born in Valdosta, Georgia and grew up in New York City, where he studied tap dance and ballet.  He made his Broadway debut at 4 and danced at Harlem's famed Apollo Theater at 12.  Raised as a Catholic, Wilson was an altar boy and spent summers with a Pentecostal grandmother in Georgia. He considered the priesthood but took up acting instead.  At the age of 6, Wilson's appendix ruptured, almost killing him. At that time the young Wilson vowed to somehow serve God as an adult in some ministry capacity. Wilson served in the United States Army from 1966 to 1968 and was in the 4th Infantry Division in Vietnam where he was wounded. Upon returning home as a decorated veteran in the late 1960s, Wilson was featured in several Broadway and Off Broadway stage productions before moving to Hollywood where he performed guest roles on several television series such as Mission: Impossible and All in the Family and acted in films such as The Dealing (1970) and The Organization (1971).

Sanford and Son (1971-1977) and other acting projects

Later in 1971, after appearing as a robber on All in the Family with Cleavon Little, Wilson won the role of Lamont Sanford in the NBC sitcom Sanford and Son. Wilson played Lamont through the run of the series, and became the star when Redd Foxx walked off the show in 1974 over a salary dispute with the producers and his character was written out for the rest of the season. Foxx returned the following year and the pair worked together until 1977 when the show was canceled despite being still very popular. In 1980-1981, Foxx attempted to revive the show with the short-lived sitcom Sanford, but Wilson refused to reprise his role as Lamont Sanford for the new series.

Wilson also appeared in the films Full Moon High (1981), Me and the Kid (1993), and Hammer-Lock (2000).

Baby, I'm Back (1978), and The New Odd Couple (1982)

Wilson later starred as divorcé Raymond Ellis in the short-lived CBS-TV comedy series Baby, I'm Back and as Oscar Madison, opposite actor Ron Glass (who co-starred as Felix Unger) in the ABC TV sitcom The New Odd Couple, a revamped black version of the original 1970-75 series on the same network which starred Jack Klugman and Tony Randall.

Ministerial work

Wilson lived in Conroe, Texas for many years until 1984, when he became an ordained minister, fulfilling his childhood vow. Later, in 1995, he founded Restoration House, a center that helps rehabilitate former prison inmates by providing mentoring, spiritual guidance, and vocational training.

Literary works

Author of Christian books

Wilson has written several Christian books concerning the New Age Movement and its hidden dangers to society. New Age Millennium was released by CAP Publishing & Literary Co. LLC on December 1, 1998. (Demond's first name is misspelled "Desmond" on some book selling websites.) Wilson, who has also authored numerous children's books, stated the book to be an "exposé" of certain New Age "symbols and slogans".

Second Banana: book about Sanford & Son TV show

Wilson has also authored the book Second Banana: The Bittersweet Memoirs of the Sanford & Son Years, which was released on August 31, 2009. According to an interview on the CelebrityCafe.com website, Wilson said: "It's just a documented truth, behind the scenes factual account of what happened during those years. Redd (Foxx) and I were making history back in those days. We were the first blacks to be on television in that capacity and we opened the door for all those other shows that came after us."

Recent TV and film appearances and projects

Wilson has also made numerous guest appearances on the Praise The Lord program aired on the Trinity Broadcasting Network, and is a good friend of Clifton Davis.He has also appeared as a guest star on the UPN sitcom Girlfriends, playing Lynn's biological father. Wilson was a guest on Bill O'Reilly's The O'Reilly Factor on January 30, 2009.

In summer of 2011 Wilson started appearing with actress Nina Nicole in a touring production of the play The Measure of a Man by playwright Matt Hardwick. The play is described as "a faith-based production" and is set in a small town in south Georgia.

Faith Ties film project

Wilson has been working since 2010 to produce and act in a melodramatic family film based on the play Faith Ties. Says Wilson of the project: "I play a broken down old drunk whose wife and daughter are killed and he's given up on life. His only friend is a talking scorpion named Adonis. The protagonist is a pastor who is in the middle while he watches the lives of people crumbling around him."

Personal life

Wilson has been married to the former model Cicely Johnston since 1972 or 1974; they have six children.  During his marriage, Wilson has had extramarital affairs.  At one point in his life, Wilson was a cocaine addict.


