
#Article: Ivan Bosiljčić
#Type: regular article

Ivan Bosiljčić (Иван Босиљчић, ) (born 15 January 1979 in Titovo Užice, Serbia, Yugoslavia) is a Serbian actor. He is popular for his leading roles in theatrical musicals such as Chicago and Kiss me Kate and his television and cinematographic roles.

Early life to professional

During high school, he showed musical talent and he set up his own band, Rok Apoteka. Upon completing high school, Bošiljčić moved to Novi Sad to attend the Academy of Arts under Vida Ognjenović in 2001. He later moved to Belgrade to pursue his acting career. His first role was to provide the voices (dubbed in Serbian) for children’s animated programs such as Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles for the part of Donatello and in Yu-Gi-Oh!.

His first appearance in a more serious role occurred in 2004 when he starred in a television film produced by the Radio Television of Serbia named "O štetnosti duvana" (About the dangers of tobacco). Although Ivan from an early age starred in some musical productions such as Grease, it wasn’t until his breakthrough roles in the Theatre on Terazije located in Belgrade (the Serbian equivalent to Broadway) that he became noticed.

National interest came after Bošiljčić acted in Stižu dolari (The dollars are coming). He appeared in both seasons one and two as a young accountant.

Theater

Mostly a musical theater actor, some of his more well-known roles include “Cigani lete u nebo (Gypsies fly in the sky), Kiss me Kate, Chicago, Svetlosti pozornice (Stage Lights) and A Chorus Line. All of these are performed at the Theatre on Terazije. He also stars in the emotional drama "Jasmin na stranputici" (Jasmin on the crossroads) in the Slavija Theatre in Belgrade.

In 2007 he became a regular in the famous musical Les Misérables at the Belgrade Madlenianum Opera House, while in 2012 starred in musical Rebecca in the same opera. Some other theatre productions he has appeared in are "Hamlet", "Bogojavljanska noć" (for which he received an award for the best young actor), "Mileva Einstein" and "Brzina tame" (The speed of the night).

Bosiljčić is also starring in the Theatre on Terazije production of "Maratonci trče počasni krug", which opened in May 2008. He is playing the role of Mirko Topalović.

Television

Bošiljcić acted in popular RTS shows Bela Lađa (White Ship) and Ranjeni Orao (Wounded Eagle), where he was one of the main characters. Currently, he stars in the TV Prva remake of ER, Urgentni Centar (lit. Emergency Center) as Dr. Arsić, a role identical to Doug Ross, played by George Clooney.He has also had previous television roles: Nenad Aleksić in Ranjeni Orao and Bojan Lazarević in Ljubav I mržnja.

Filmography

He has also had minor role in the film "Spleen" produced by an Italian film maker with an Italian crew as well as Serbian movies "Strah od letenja" (Fear of flying) and "Moné".

At the "National Film Festival" in Niš in 2008 he was praised for the role as Vasile in the film "On the Beautiful Blue Danube".

Personal life

In 2006 Bosiljčić completed compulsory military service, which must be completed by law in Serbia, lasting only a few months.Now he is married to Serbian singer Jelena Tomasevic; the couple had a baby girl named Nina, born on 24 January 2012.

Filmography

	 Strah od letenja (2003)

	 Spleen (2004)

	 Moné (2005)

	 Gde cveta limun žut (2006)

	 Na lepom plavom Dunavu (2008)


