
#Article: Ursula Groden-Kranich
#Type: regular article

Ursula Groden-Kranich (born 24 May 1965) is a German politician and member of the Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU). She was elected to the Bundestag on 22 September 2013 in the constituency of Mainz with 40.1 percent of the vote. She is also a member of the Mainz City Council and was the local representative for Mainz-Hechtsheim between 2004 and 2014.

Education and Career

After graduating from the Maria-Ward School, Mainz in 1984, Groden-Kranich continued her training at the LRP Landesbank Rhineland-Palatinate. She has continued to work for them as an investment advisor from 1989 until 2014. Groden-Kranich is married and has a daughter. She is the honorary vice chairman of the German Red Cross in the Mainz-Bingen district, as well as being the chairman in the local branch of Mainz-Hechtsheim. She also sits at the head of the support group for the St Pankratius Church in her locality.

Politics

Party

Groden-Kranich joined the Young Union of Germany (Junge Union), the youth branch of the CDU and CSU, in 1982 and later worked on the board of the CDU in Hechtsheim. She was also a member of the federal committee for Kommunalpolitischen Vereinigung (KPV) of the party.

Public Offices

In 1994 she was elected to the local council in Hechtsheim and subsequently joined the city council in 1999, on which she still currently serves. As a member of the city council she is the vice chairman of the CDU branch of the council and sits on the following committees:

	Haupt- und Personalausschuss

	Financial committee

	Subcommittee on airport expansion and protection from aircraft noise pollution 

	Advisory committee “Fluglärmbeirat Layenhof”

	Neighbourhood committee for City of Mainz and the Mainz-Bingen region 

	Layenhof association 

	Governing body for the maintenance of public services in Mainz 

	Governing body for the “Zentralen Beteiligungsgesellschaft Mainz“ (ZBM)

	Member of the General meeting of the “Sparkasse” association

In 2004 she was elected to be the local representative for Mainz-Hechtsheim and was reelected in 2009. She decided to succeed Ute Granold and stand as the CDU candidate for the Mainz constituency for the 2013 general election. She was successful and was elected directly to the Bundestag through first preference votes. Due to the subsequent increase in work commitments she decided to retire from her role as the local representative for Hechtsheim in 2014.


