
#Article: James Bernard Schafer
#Type: regular article

James Bernard Schafer (1896 - April 26, 1955) was a man primarily known as the founder of a cult known as the Royal Fraternity of Master Metaphysicians and by an attempt to raise an "immortal baby".

Early years

Schafer was born in Fargo, North Dakota. He earned a medical doctors degree at the University of Michigan. He also joined the Ku Klux Klan.

Royal Fraternity of Master Metaphysicians

The group was founded in the 1920s and had attracted thousands by the 1930s, most being middle-aged women. An inner circle of male members was known as "The Storks", who made layettes.

In January 13, 1938, the group purchased the 24-acre William Kissam Vanderbilt Estate in Long Island as a retreat. He renamed the mansion "Peace Haven."

The retreat was open only to paying members, who were charged $100 ().

Pepperidge Hall, former mansion of suicide Christopher R. Robert, was nearly purchased by the group in 1939. However, the sale later fell through.

A building, built by Jay Gould at 217 W. 57th Street as a stable, was purchased by the group in February 1940 as the location for an auditorium. The group also purchased the Adelphi Theatre, changed its name to the "Radiant Center", and put on metaphysical plays there.

The Immortal baby

In November 1939, he announced his intention to bring Baby Jean, whose mother, a waitress named Catherine Gauntt, was too poor to raise her, into the mansion and prepare her for everlasting life through metaphysics and a special vegetable diet. It was intended that she eventually become the groups immortal leader. However, the experiment terminated early, in December 1940 when they returned Baby Jean to her parents, citing both her parents wishes and the cost. Later, her mother filed suit. Grand larceny charges were also filed by the Attorney General, John J. Bennett, Jr.

Questions centered around various lawsuits filed by others against the group and also Baby Jean's property, which included a diamond ring supposedly valued at $50,000 ().

The group encountered financial difficulties during the trial and Peace Haven was foreclosed and auctioned off.

On March 24, 1942 he pled guilty and was sent to Sing Sing on May 5 for a term of at least 5 years. During that time, he lost Peace Haven, which is now part of Dowling College. Upon his release, he opened a correspondence school in metaphysics in upstate New York and published a magazine devoted to metaphysical issues.

Later years

On April 26, 1955, Schafer and his wife Cecilia were found dead in their car on the grounds of his school.  There was a suicide note on the seat beside them, detailing instructions for their daughter on how to continue operating the school. It also stated that they had "no other way out." Schafer was 59. His wife was 55.

Works


