
#Article: P. K. Abdul Aziz
#Type: regular article

P.K. Abdul Aziz (born 18 January 1947), also known as P. K. Abdul Azis, is a scientist in Ecology and Biodiversity and an academic from India who has published 77 research papers,. He has been the Vice-Chancellor of Cochin University of Science and Technology and Aligarh Muslim University. He is also the former Vice-Chancellor of the University of Science and Technology Meghalaya. He is also the chairman of the Expert Committee for Revision of Curriculum for School Education, appointed by the Kerala government.

Early education and career

He received a D.Sc in Ecology (2002) and a PhD (1978) from the Department of Aquatic Biology & Fisheries, University of Kerala.

He led the Department of Ecology and Marine Biology at the Saline Water Conversion Corporation Research and Development Centre, Saudi Arabia as chairman during 1993-2002.

He was a Professor at Kerala University and Kerala Agricultural University before becoming Vice-Chancellor of the Cochin University of Science and Technology.

He was the Vice-Chancellor of Aligarh Muslim University from 11 June 2007, to 17 January 2012. During his term he initiated a "crackdown" against squatters and put into place ID cards for all students. The university also signed MoUs with Wisconsin University, Cleveland University, Atlanta University, Johns Hopkins University and New York University and began clearing a backlog of PhD submissions. India Today cited his efforts as leading to a "remarkable turnaround" for the university.

Vice-chancellorship

He stepped down from the VC office on 17 January 2012, during an investigation by the CBI. The CBI's interim report released on 11 January had found him guilty of financial impropriety "related to travel concession for family, income tax payment from University funds and purchase of luxury cars"; the remainder of the allegations would be released in a final report. An earlier two-person panel investigating had deadlocked. Abdul Aziz's departure was cited by India Today as evidence of the "waning influence" of the "Malayali lobby" in Delhi.

He was later cleared of all charges by the CBI; a closure report was submitted by the CBI at the Patiala House Court. Even when the investigation had started, Abdul Aziz had refuted all the charges and had said that "the truth would eventually come out". At the end of his term, Aziz said he had "no regrets" about the decisions he had made during his tenure at the university.


