
#Article: Atef Tarawneh
#Type: regular article

Atef Tarawneh (born 1954) is a Jordanian politician and the Speaker of the House of Representatives since 3 November 2013.

Political career

Tarawneh was part of the 14th, 15th, and 16th Parliaments, serving in the House of Representatives. He also served as Deputy Speaker of the House at one point. In February 2011, while he was Deputy Speaker, he criticized the government's decision to strip Jordanian citizenship from some Jordanians with Palestinian origin on claims that it supported the Palestinian people and their goal of a state. The idea behind the government policy was said to be to protect the Palestinian identity. Tarawneh revealed that several high-ranking Palestinian leaders and negotiators had received Jordanian citizenship during the same period. He claimed that the policy was contradictory and that it undermined national unity.

Tarawneh led the party Nation List in the Jordanian general election in 2013. The list comprised native Jordanians and Jordanians of Palestinian descent. The list, referred to as Watan or Homeland, received 94682 votes in the election and thereby earned two seats, which went to Tarawneh and Khamis Atiyeh.

Tarawneh ran in the November 2013 Speaker elections, which were held at the start of the regular session of the 17th parliament. On 20 October, out of a total of six candidates, his main competitor was seen as incumbent Speaker Saad Hayel Srour. Tarawneh had the support of his Homeland bloc in parliament, consisting of 20 Representatives, and he could count on another 39 votes by forming a coalition with two other blocs. On 3 November the first round of voting started, with only three candidates remaining. Tarawneh gained 60 votes, Abdul Karim Dughmi gained 43 votes and Srour gained 37 votes. In the second round Tarawneh was to compete against Dughmi, Dughmi however withdrew his candidacy just before the start of the voting. Tarawneh was therefore declared winner.

He was re-elected as Speaker on 2 November 2014.

Personal life

Tarawneh was born in Khalidiyah, Karak Governorate. He is married and has four children.


