
#Article: Farrah Abraham
#Type: regular article

Farrah Lynn Abraham (born May 31, 1991) is an American reality television personality. Born in Omaha, Nebraska, and raised in Council Bluffs, Iowa, she came to prominence after being cast in the reality television series 16 and Pregnant in 2009, which documented the pregnancies and first months of motherhood for several young women. Later that year she was cast in the spin-off series Teen Mom, and appeared in each of its four seasons until its conclusion in 2012. That August she released her debut studio album and first memoir, both of which were titled My Teenage Dream Ended. The book made it onto The New York Times Best Seller list, while the album was named the 32nd best album of 2012 by The Guardian, which called it "the weirdest record you've heard this year. A truly bizarre mix of generic Guetta-pop beats, drilling sounds, and Abraham's abrasive AutoTuned vocals".

In 2013, Abraham gained worldwide notoriety after the release of the 'sex tape' Farrah Superstar: Backdoor Teen Mom, in which she appeared with adult-film star James Deen; its sequel Farrah 2: Backdoor and More included unused footage from the first shoot and was released the following year. In 2014, she appeared on the fourth season of Couples Therapy individually; in doing so, she became the first cast member to participate without a partner. In 2015, she returned to Teen Mom with the spin-off series Teen Mom OG. 

Early life

Farrah Abraham was born on May 31, 1991 in Omaha, Nebraska; she was raised in Council Bluffs, Iowa. Her father is of Syrian and Italian descent, and her mother is of Danish and Sicilian ancestry. Her parents Debra Danielson and Michael Abraham divorced in 2010; she stated that her parents abused her as a child, adding that she "had cuts, bruises, welts, swelling and scars." In her adolescence she was a cheerleader for her high school.

Career

Teen Mom

Abraham began dating her boyfriend Derek Underwood in 2006 and became pregnant by him in 2008. Underwood died in a car accident on December 28, 2008, eight months into her pregnancy. Abraham was denied an abortion by her mother, who noted that it was against her personal beliefs. She discontinued cheerleading and continued her coursework at a community college after rumors of her pregnancy became widespread. Despite having been estranged, Abraham commented that "He was my first love, my only true love" and elaborated that "now Derek was gone forever, and so was my happy ending." She gave birth to their daughter, Sophia Laurent Abraham, on February 23, 2009.

Abraham appeared on the second episode of the first season of 16 and Pregnant, a reality television series broadcast by MTV, on June 18, 2009; it documented her pregnancy and her first months of motherhood. Later that year she was cast in the spin-off series Teen Mom; it followed Abraham, in addition to Maci Bookout, Catelynn Lowell and Amber Portwood, who also appeared on episodes of 16 and Pregnant, during their first years of motherhood. The series premiere was broadcast on December 8, 2009. In January 2010 Abraham's mother Danielson was arrested and charged with assault after Abraham sustained "multiple cuts to the right side of her mouth" after a physical argument. Abraham recognized the altercation as the "turning point" in which she realized that she "needed to stop the abuse." In 2011 she began attending the Art Institute of Fort Lauderdale in Florida, where she got an associate degree in culinary arts and management. She later launched the "Mom & Me" pasta sauce line.

On August 1, 2012, Abraham ventured into the music industry with the release of her debut studio album My Teenage Dream Ended. It received mixed reviews from contemporary music critics. Abraham released a memoir by the same title on August 14. After airing four seasons, the series finale of Teen Mom aired on August 29, 2012.

2013-present: "Sex tape" and continued career

In 2013, Abraham was arrested for suspicion of driving under the influence; she pled guilty to the charges that June, and was sentenced to six months of probation, six months of sobriety tests and a $500 fine. In April, it was speculated that a sex tape in which Abraham was featured was being offered to several pornographic distributors. Despite initially stating that the footage was leaked, she later stated that she hired adult-film star James Deen to make the tape with her, with the intention of selling the material; she justified this as "celebrating your awesome body getting your own sexy shots." Abraham reportedly earned $1.5 million after selling the tape to Vivid Entertainment, which released the clip under the title Farrah Superstar: Backdoor Teen Mom. Although professionally produced, it was marketed as a leaked sex tape. She stated that she was "drugged and raped more than once" during appearances at pornographic conventions and strip clubs made after its release, which she described as a "dark time". Abraham later commented that her affiliation with the adult-film industry "made it hard to have friends and a private life and to trust family, who I feel use me for money", and believed that the sex tape "ruined my life."

In January 2014, Abraham was cast for the fourth season of Couples Therapy. However, Brian Dawe claimed that he was hired by Abraham to appear as her on-screen boyfriend and ultimately did not appear on the program alongside her. Abraham consequently became the only cast member in the series' history to continue therapy without a partner, and was refocused on repairing her relationship with her mother. With her previous allegations of rape placing a strain on her partnership with Vivid Entertainment, a press release announcing her second sex tape Farrah 2: Backdoor and More in February stated "it's no 'fake' 'leak'--it's the real, raw, ridiculous deal, and it suits Farrah's underhanded personality herself." Later that month Abraham appeared in the TV special Being Farrah, which acted as a continuation of Teen Mom; Bookout, Lowell, and Portwood were respectively featured in the specials Being Maci, Being Catelynn, and Being Amber. Their successes prompted MTV to consider reviving the series without Abraham, who the other women were concerned was an inappropriate influence on their children. In March she returned to the music industry with the release of the song "Blowin'" and the simultaneous premiere of its accompanying music video. She stated that she treats music as a "hobby, not my career move." In August of that year she signed a contract with Palazio's Gentleman's Club in Austin, Texas, for $544,000 to have a residency there until New Year's Eve. On August 27, 2015, she entered the Celebrity Big Brother house representing the USA. On September 18, she became the fifth housemate to be evicted. She was not in the top four highest voted housemates and her fellow housemate, Austin Armacost, chose to evict her. She had spent 23 days in the house. On September 22, Abraham appeared as a panelist on the Bit on the Side after show and got into a heated argument with fellow panelist, Aisleyne Horgan-Wallace, the argument resulted in all the panelists being removed. It's been reported that Horgan-Wallace threw her drink in Abraham's face and Abraham then began throwing glasses at her. Another panelist, actress, Vicki Michelle was reported to have been sent to the hospital after a glass smashed on her head. Abraham was escorted out by the security team. The event resulted in the local police beginning an investigation into the matter.

Filmography

Discography

	 My Teenage Dream Ended (2012)

	 Blowin (2014)

Published works

	 My Teenage Dream Ended (2012)

	 Passy Perfume (2012)

	 Celebrity Sex Tape: In The Making (2014)

	 Celebrity Sex Tape: The Secret's Out (2014)

	 Celebrity Sex Tape: Love Through Limelight (2015)


