
#Article: Jilani Chowdhury
#Type: regular article

Jilani Chowdhury (জীলালী চৌধুরী; born 18 September 1964) is a British Labour Party politician, councillor for Barnsbury and former Mayor of Islington. In May 2012, he became Islington's first Bangladeshi mayor.

Early life

Chowdhury was born in Moulvibazar District, East Pakistan (now Bangladesh). He attended Moulvibazar Government High School.

Civil service career

Chowdhury was General Secretary of the Students Union of Moulvibazar College, Bangladesh. In this role he took part in the movement against the military regime in Bangladesh. Having finished his BA degree, he joined the civil service and was selected as General Secretary of the Civil Service Association of Bangladesh, standing for employee rights and equal opportunities.

He was also involved in the Bangladeshi student movement, campaigning for the removal of the military dictatorship and the restoration of democracy. 

Political career

In 1992, Chowdhury arrived in Archway, London, England. When he and his wife first arrived in Islington they stayed with her father above an Indian restaurant in Holloway Road.

Chowdhury became involved in local politics through supporting Jeremy Corbyn MP as a translator and then joined the Labour Party. In May 2006, in the Islington Borough Council election, he was elected as a Labour Party councillor for Barnsbury and has served as Deputy Mayor of Islington since 2011. During his time as a councillor, Jilani completed a BSc degree in Community Sector Management at London Metropolitan University. After serving as deputy mayor for a year, in May 2012, he was elected Mayor of Islington and became Islington's first Bangladeshi mayor.

Community work

Chowdury is project manager for a community centre for older people called Working With Older People in Camden (where he has worked for 10 years), which focuses on offering services that are culturally appropriate for its users. He is also governor at Thornhill Primary School.

Personal life

Chowdury lives in Tufnell Park, Archway, London with his wife Nilu, two sons Isdhani and Ijtihad, and daughter Nuzhat. Both Chowdury's parents are dead.

See also

	British Bangladeshi

	List of British Bangladeshis

	List of ethnic minority politicians in the United Kingdom


