
#Article: Božo Petrov
#Type: regular article

Božo Petrov (born 16 October 1979) is a Croatian politician and psychiatrist who currently serves as mayor of Metković.

Early life and family

Petrov was born in Metković. He attended elementary school in his hometown and high school (classical gymnasium) in Sinj. At age 14 he decided to join the Franciscan order, but eventually changed his mind.

He graduated from the Medical Faculty of the University of Mostar in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and specialized psychiatry in the Psychiatric Hospital Vrapče in Zagreb, after which he worked as a psychiatrist at the University Clinical Hospital in Mostar. He is married to a primary school teacher; the couple has three children.

Political career

On 17 November 2012, with other people who have never actively participated in political life, Petrov founded the Bridge of Independent Lists as a regionalist political platform, of which he is the first president.

In 2013 Bridge of Independent Lists participated in the local elections in the town of Metković. The party won 46.25% of votes, and 9 out of 17 seats in the City Council. Turnout was 67,49%. Božo Petrov won 45.78% of the votes and entered the second round of elections for the Mayor against Stipe Gabrić Jambo, incumbent mayor since 1997. In the second round Petrov won with 67.94% of the votes and became the mayor of Metković. At the same election, Bridge of Independent Lists won 9.97% of the vote in county elections and entered the County Assembly of the Dubrovnik-Neretva County.

As a mayor, Petrov cut his and the city councillors' wage to the minimum. Finding a city debt of 17.6 million, he managed to bring it down by 6.4 million, or 36%. His deputies work as volunteers, while the councillors' fees amount to a symbolic 1 HRK. Petrov abolished also the compensation to the members of supervisory boards and management councils, and representation expenses decreased by 10 times and travel costs by 8 times. He also terminated several expensive public contracts, and introduced transparency in public spending. His work to sanitize the city's budget got him to be declared the best mayor in the region. After having halved the city debt, he increased the salaries of the city administration, but they remained 30% lower than they were at the time he took office as mayor.

For the 2015 parliamentary elections, his Most party went national and was joined by independent local politicians from other parts of the country. Led by Petrov, the party campaigned for fiscal responsibility, reduction of government spending and public debt, tax cuts, reforms in the public sector and the reduction of administrative divisions in Croatia.


