
#Article: January Makamba
#Type: regular article

January Yusuf Makamba (born 28 January 1974) is a Tanzanian CCM politician and Member of Parliament for Bumbuli constituency since 2010. He is the Deputy Minister of Communication, Science and Technology.

Early life and career

Makamba was born in Singida Region and is the eldest of four children. His father, Yusuf Makamba, a stalwart of the country's dominant ruling party, the Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM) and had served as its Secretary General. His mother, Josephine, is from Missenyi District in Kagera Region. He spent his early childhood in his ancestral home of Mahezangulu village in Lushoto District and at his maternal grandmother's village in Kagera Region, which was at the time invaded by Ugandan troops during the Uganda-Tanzania War.

He was educated at Handeni and  secondary schools in Tanga Region; and at . He attended Quincy College in Massachusetts, United States for a preliminary course before transferring to Saint John's University in Minnesota, where he majored in Peace Studies. He then undertook an internship at the Carter Center, before obtaining his MSc in Conflict Analysis and Resolution from the School for Conflict Analysis and Resolution at George Mason University in 2004.

Upon his return to Tanzania, he joined the Foreign Ministry as a Foreign Service Officer (Grade II). Jakaya Kikwete, the Foreign Minister at the time would later on vie for the presidency in the 2005 election. Makamba joined his campaign team and traversed across the country visiting all the districts. Following Kikwete's landslide victory of over 80 percent, he was appointed as an aide to the President. His formal title was Personal Assistant to the President - Special Duties (PAP-SD); a position that he would serve for five years until 2010.

Political career

In 2010, he contested in the election as a Member of Parliament for his home constituency of Bumbuli and was elected unopposed. In the 10th Parliament, he served as the Chairman of the Parliamentary Committee for Energy and Minerals.

In April 2011, he replaced Bernard Membe as CCM's Political Affairs and International Relations Secretary and served in this post until November 2012 when he was succeeded by Asha-Rose Migiro at the 8th National Congress of the CCM. Makamba was also elected as one of the ten members of the National Executive Committee (NEC) from the mainland part of the country. He received the second highest number of votes (2,093).

In May 2012, President Kikwete appointed him as the Deputy Minister of Communication, Science and Technology following a cabinet reshuffle. In July, he launched the Bumbuli Development Corporation, a personal initiative that would seek to supplement the government's effort in bringing development to his constituency. In August 2014, he was nominated by Vodacom Tanzania CEO to participate in the Ice Bucket Challenge in order to raise awareness for obstetric fistula patients in Tanzania; or donate US$100. Makamba decided to donate TSh 1 million (US$600) instead.

In October 2014, Makamba was quoted advocating dictatorship as a means to end graft in politics.

2015 presidential campaign

Personal life

Makamba is a Muslim. He is married to Ramona and is the father of two children. He is an avid football fan and supports Coastal Union, Chelsea and Real Madrid in the Tanzanian, English and Spanish leagues.

Honours and awards

	2013: Young Global Leader by the World Economic Forum

	2013: National Democratic Institute’s Democracy Award

	2014: 10 Most Powerful Men In Africa, Forbes Magazine


