
#Article: Timothy Langley
#Type: regular article

Timothy Langley (born March 3, 1953) is an American expatriate, author and legal advisor in Japan.

Langley was the first non-Japanese to work in the Japanese Diet. He is president and representative director of Langley Esquire, a legal advice firm in Tokyo. He served as General Counsel for large multinationals, for providing lobbying in Japanese politics, and for consulting on high-profile cases. He is referred to as "the American who can get the impossible done in Japan."

Personal

Langley was born in Virginia, one of 8 children. As his father was a logistics specialist in the military, he spent little time in any one place as a young boy. His longest stay, in Okinawa between the ages of 11 and 16, had the largest impact. Later in his life, he returned to Japan in order to study Law, eventually graduating from Tohoku University. After graduating from a Japanese law school, he attempted to sit in on the Bar exam, but he was met with resistance from the bar association (bengoshikai).

Career

Unable to enter the Japanese Bar, he was recruited as an aide for Japanese Diet member Taro Nakayama (中山 太郎) and was even featured on 60 Minutes. Later, Langley returned to the United States to attend the Georgetown University School of Foreign Service Graduate Program, where he studied under Madeline Albright, concurrently he completed the Law Program also at Georgetown. He has worked as General Counsel in large multinationals and has assisted thousands of companies with their international trade. His consulting company, Langley Esquire, focuses on problem-solving, not strictly limited to legal or political issues; it is located in Yotsuya, Tokyo.

Positions

	 General Counsel & Director of Public Policy, Apple Computer Japan

	 General Counsel & Director of Public Policy, General Motors Asia Pacific

Accomplishments

	 Hosted former President of the United States George H. W. Bush during his trip to Japan.

	 Featured on PBS, Made in America Video Documentary

	 Featured on CBS's 60 Minutes, Cracks in the Facade

	 Featured on Toyo Keizai Shimbun

	 Featured on the ACCJ Journal (several)

	 Featured on The Denver Post (several)

	 Featured on Communication World

	 Featured on Japan Times  (several)

	 Guest commentator on InterFM, Morning Garage

	 Founder, ACCJ Government Relations Committee

	 Founder, ACCJ Diet Doorknock

	 Founder, Rolls-Royce & Bentley Owners’ Club of Japan

	 Regional Chairman, Rolls Royce Owners’ Club of America

Education

	 LLM, specialization in Labor Law, Tohoku University

	 MSFS, Diplomacy, Foreign Service, International Business, Georgetown University School of Foreign Service Graduate Program

	 JD, Law w/ specialization in international law, trade law

	 LLM, international law; Oil, Gas & Mining law, international environmental law specialization, University of Denver - Sturm College of Law

Honors & Awards

	 "The Commonwealth of Kentucky's commission of Colonel with all rights, privileges & responsibilities thereunto": W.G.Wilkensen, Governor of Kentucky, 1990 

	 "Citation for Patriotic Service for rescuing three neighbors trapped in a burning house, exposing himself to fire and smoke with complete disregard for his own safety, carrying the injured to safety, administering first aid and arranging for transportation to the hospital, and again entering the building to put out the fire. His selfless action contributes to the United States Army and to the Ryukyu Islands Mission by fostering better community relations, reflecting great credit upon himself": General R.E.Haines, Commander-in-Chief, United States Army Pacific, 1969 

Books

	 Memoirs of the First Foreign Political Secretary in Japan (外人政治秘書第一号　ティムのニッポン政治見聞録)


