
#Article: Epifanio Jiménez
#Type: regular article

Epifanio "Epi" Jiménez Cruz (born June 11, 1965) in Carolina, Puerto Rico is a Puerto Rican politician who held many occupations in the New Progressive Party and was elected to a seat at 40th district in the Puerto Rico House of Representatives. Currently performs as an officer in the Army National Guard of Puerto Rico.

Early years and studies

Epifanio Jiménez Cruz is the son of Epifanio Jiménez Meléndez and Miriam Cruz Rodríguez. He had primary and secondary studies at Colegio La Piedad in Isla Verde, Puerto Rico until he graduated. Later he went to the University of Puerto Rico where he earned a bachelor's degree in commerce with a concentration in Human Resources. Jiménez also enrolled in the Army Reserve Officers Training Corps Program ROTC where in 1988 he commissioned as a 2nd lieutenant and joined the Puerto Rico Army National Guard. Today he has the rank of LTC and continues to work on the logistics branch at the National Guard of Puerto Rico.

Political career

In 1984 he began a political career as an electoral worker and president of the New Progressive Party municipal youth committee in Carolina, Puerto Rico. In 1994 Epifanio Jiménez was an aide of Senator Charlie Rodriguez and ran in a special election where he succeeded to become the Representative for the 39th district in the Puerto Rico House of Representatives. Jiménez was reelected in the 1996, 2000 and 2004 general elections. In 2004 the 39 district became the 40th district. From 2004 to 2008 Jiménez was the Speaker pro tempore of the House of Representatives of Puerto Rico. In 2008, Jiménez ran for Mayor of Carolina, Puerto Rico. The standing mayor, José Aponte Dalmau from the Popular Democratic Party, was able to keep his position.

Military awards and decorations

	 Meritorious Service Medal

	 Army Commendation Medal

	 Army Achievement Medal

	 Reserve Good Conduct Medal 

	 National Defense Service Medal with bronze service star

	 Army Service Ribbon

	 Armed Forces Reserve Medal (with Silver Hourglass Device)

	 Global War on Terrorism Service Medal

	 Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal

Personal life

He is married to Elizabeth Gallo (since 1988) and has 3 children Epifanio, Gian Carlo and Gabriel. He still lives in Carolina, Puerto Rico.


