
#Article: Sermkhun Kunawong
#Type: regular article

Sermkhun Kunawong or "Mr.Jok" is a Thai event tycoon and the founder of CMO PLC. , the ASEAN’s leading creative event management organization. As a CEO of the company, he is a key person behind numerous renowned national and international events. He is also commonly known as the establisher of Bangkok Sculpture Center and a contemporary photographer, who has successfully hosted 3 photo exhibitions in Thailand in recent times.

Biography

“Sermkhun Kunawong” was born on July 5, 1960 in Nakornsawan, Thailand. He attended Bodindecha (Sing Singhaseni) School and obtained a bachelor's degree from the faculty of Communication Arts, Chulalongkorn University, in Bangkok.

In his career life, Sermkhun started his profession as a freelance photographer, who was specialized in both still and motion pictures. In 1986, he established the first company under his supervision called “The Eyes”, which is the Thailand’s leading multimedia and multivision production house. Aiming to expand business diversity in 1990, he founded PM Center and positioned it as the biggest light & sound rental service provider in ASEAN.

Later in 1991, he pioneered the event management industry and established CM Organizer (or CMO Group) as an outstanding leader creative event management business in ASEAN.  The company was listed in the stock market with registered capital of $US 3.75 million in 2004, making it the first event company to be registered in the Market of Alternative Investment in Thailand. In 2011, it went over a mega rebranding campaign and was renamed into CMO Public Company Limited.

Beside his dominant role as a businessperson, Sermkhun also takes an additional role as an influence in Thai art industry. His passion for Thai modern art  led to the establishment of the Bangkok Sculpture Center, which is the largest sculpture exhibition center in Thailand. Located on Soi Naunchan (covering an area of 4 rai), the center welcomes all interested visitors free of charge. His outstanding talent in photography has also led to the launch of 3 private contemporary photo exhibitions, which reputed him a famous contemporary photographer in Thailand.


