
#Article: Roberto Nicastro
#Type: regular article

Roberto Nicastro is an Italian businessman and banker, is currently General Manager of the Unicredit Group and has worked in the past with McKinsey & Co and Salomon Brothers. He is also involved in postgraduate education advisories and charitable activities.

Early years

He was born in Trento, on December 9, 1964 where he has lived up to senior age.

He then moved to Milano, where he earned a Major in Business Administration at the Bocconi University in 1989, under Professor Claudio Dematté's tutorship.

Career

In 1989 he joined the M&A department of Salomon Brothers in London.

In 1991 he became a strategic consultant in Milan with McKinsey & Co, where he had been involved in consumer goods, financial services and banking regulation projects in Italy and in Brazil.

Roberto Nicastro joined UniCredit in May 1997, as Head of Strategy, Planning and Control of then Credito Italiano. In the early years at Unicredit he developed the footprint of the Unicredit Group in Central and Eastern Europe thru the acquisition and following restructuring/integration of Bank Pekao (Poland), Zagrebačka banka (Croatia-Bosnia), Bulbank (Bulgaria), Koçbank (50%, Turkey), Živnostenská banka (Czech republic), Demir Bank (Romania), Polnobanka (Slovakia). By 2003 Unicredit had become one of the top three banking groups in the CEE region.

In 2003 he became Head of Italian Retail and CEO of UniCredit Banca, where beyond turning around the profitability of the business, he had been introducing companywide leadership trainings and individualized coaching  as well as systematic customer satisfaction measurement and incentive systems.

In July 2007 he was appointed Deputy CEO of the UniCredit group and became head of Unicredit retail operations in Italy, Germany, Austria and Poland.Following the appointment of Federico Ghizzoni as Unicredit’s Group CEO, he was appointed as the General Manager of Unicredit.

In this capacity he is in charge of Austria, CEE, Poland, Asset Gathering (Fineco) and he is groupwide responsible for Marketing and Multichannel Development, Internal Control System and Institutional and Regulatory Affairs.

He serves also as Deputy Chairman of the Supervisory Board of Bank Pekao (Poland) and as member of the Supervisory Boards of Bank Austria and of ZAO UniCredit Bank Russia.

He is First Deputy Chairman of the Italian Banking Association (ABI), and member of the Executive Committee of Assonime.From 2009 to 2012 Roberto Nicastro served as Chairman of EFMA, the European Financial Management Association in Paris  and has often been quoted on Commercial and European banking matters.

Other activities

He serves in the advisory board of SDA Bocconi, Milan, of Alma School Bologna and of The Johns Hopkins University SAIS Bologna Center.He serves as well in the board of Fondazione Archè, a charity in Milano  and in the Comitato Amici di Claudio Dematté in Trento.

Personal life

Roberto Nicastro is married with Silvia and has two children, Camilla and Lorenzo.


