
#Article: Roger Bisby
#Type: regular article

Roger Lawrence Bisby (born 16 November 1952) is an English television presenter and journalist, known for his expertise in the British building industry. He was the building expert on the long-running British consumer affairs television series Watchdog and then later Rogue Traders, both for the BBC.

Biography

Born in the City of London, one of six children to opera singer Charles Yates Bisby and his wife Jean Hazel Bisby, Bisby initially entered the building industry as an apprentice plumber. He went on to train as a college lecturer, and has also run his own building company for nearly 30 years.

Media career

In the last 20 years, Bisby has had a media career in many different areas. He has written articles and reviews for magazines and newspapers, had a series of DIY books published, appeared in television programmes, hosted radio shows, and more recently he has written a blog and started podcasting.

Publishing

Bisby entered journalism after sending an unsolicited article to a local paper as a PR exercise for his building company. Bisby currently works on several building trade publications for Hamerville Publishing including Professional Builder magazine (for which he has been Products Editor for 16 years), Professional Electrician, Professional Heating and Plumbing Installer, and Professional Housebuilder and Property Developer.

Published books include:

	 Marshall Cavendish DIY guides

	 Reader’s Digest DIY Encyclopaedia

	 Fix It DIY

	 Here’s How

	 The Knack

	 Plumbing and Central Heating, Hamlyn Practical DIY Guides

	 B&Q Best Way To Do It series

Radio

Bisby was the expert on LBC's Fix It Phone In which remained one of their most popular shows throughout its 15 years of broadcast. Bisby has also made guest appearances on talkSPORT, local BBC Radio and Capital FM.

Television

His television work includes appearances as the resident expert on The Terrace (BBC), Watchdog (BBC), Rogue Traders (BBC) and Dirty Tricks of the Tradesmen (BBC).

Television appearances:

	 This Morning with Richard and Judy (ITV) - DIY Phone In

	 Good Morning with Anne and Nick (ITV) - DIY Phone In

	 Granada Television - DIY programmes

	 Watchdog (BBC) - resident building expert

	 Rogue Traders (BBC) - resident plumbing and heating expert

	 House of Horrors (ITV) - resident building expert

	 The Terrace (BBC) - resident building expert

	 BBC News - building industry pundit

	 Sky News - plumbing and heating expert

	 Dirty Tricks of the Tradesmen (BBC) - acting rogue tradesman

Corporate

Since 1992, Bisby has been involved in the production of corporate media as a writer, voiceover artist, presenter, advisor and producer.Corporate work:

	 Worcester Bosch Group - Energy House, Boiler Installation Guides and Guide to Energy Efficiency

	 Wedi - Tile Backer and Fundo

	 Stanley Tools - Range Overview

	 Jeyes - Cleaning up in the Garden

	 Marshalls Paving - Range Guide

	 Alpha Tape - Alfa Tape Live Demonstration

	 Titan - Installing the Ecosafe

	 NuHeat Underfloor Heating - Installation Guide

	 DeWalt Powertools - Range Overview

	 Bosch Power tools - Getting the Job Done

Internet

More recently, Bisby has moved into New Media with his Self Build and DIY web site and YouTube Channel Skill Builder, which he co-developed with Colchester based production company Motion New Media.

Personal life

Bisby enjoys cycling (at the age of 13 he cycled around Britain), travel, running and rock climbing. He also gets involved in environmental clean ups.


