
#Article: Angellah Kairuki
#Type: regular article

Angellah Jasmine Mbelwa Kairuki (born 10 September 1976) is a Tanzanian CCM politician and a special seat Member of Parliament since 2010. She is the current Deputy Minister for Lands, Housing and Human Settlement.Previously served as Deputy Minister for Constitutional and Legal Affairs. Prior to joining politics, she worked in the Attorney General’s Chambers as Parliamentary Draftsman and as a State Attorney in the Office of the Director of Public Prosecution.

Angellah Kairuki has also worked in the Private Sector as Head of Department of the Ethics, Compliance and Governance at VODACOM Group PTY. In 2011 she was appointed by the Speaker of the National Assembly to represent Tanzania in the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and she was elected by the IPU assembly to become a Member of Human Rights Committee of the IPU.Currently she holds the portfolio of Secretary General of the Tanzania Women Parliamentary Group. She is also a member of the National Executive Committee of the ruling party Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM) and Member of the National Council of UWT, the ruling party’s women wing. 

Angellah is an advocate of the High Court of Tanzania and a Member of Tanzania Institute of Arbitrators. She has an LLB degree from the University of Hull and a PgDL in Legal Practice from Staffordshire University. In 2012 Angellah took part in the inaugural Leadership for Change in Africa programme by the African Leadership Institute, and was on the list of Forbes magazine’ 20 Young Power African Women in 2013. In 2014 she was chosen by the World Economic Forum to be a Young Global Leader.

In 2015 she signed an open letter which the ONE Campaign had been collecting signatures for; the letter was addressed to Angela Merkel and Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, urging them to focus on women as they serve as the head of the G7 in Germany and the AU in South Africa respectively, which will start to set the priorities in development funding before a main UN summit in September 2015 that will establish new development goals for the generation.


