
#Article: Stephanie Ruhle
#Type: regular article

Stephanie Ruhle (born December 24, 1975) is a managing editor and news anchor for Bloomberg Television and editor-at-large for Bloomberg News. Ruhle currently co-hosts the Bloomberg Television show Market Makers. Ruhle is known as the first journalist to break the 2012 story of the London Whale, identifying the trader behind the 2012 JPMorgan Chase trading loss.

Career

Ruhle joined Bloomberg Television in October 2011, where she co-hosted a two-hour early morning program called “Inside Track” with co-anchor Erik Schatzker. In 2012, Ruhle and Schatzker joined “Market Makers,” a two-hour late morning program. She has profiled iconic figures including former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, Goldman Sachs CEO Lloyd Blankfein, hedge fund managers Stanley Druckenmiller and David Tepper, NBA player Kobe Bryant, former Vice President Al Gore, business magnate Russell Simmons, musician Sean Combs and musician Kanye West.

In April 2012, Ruhle, along with Bloomberg reporters Bradley Keoun and Mary Childs, was the first reporter to break the story of the London Whale, the trader behind the 2012 JPMorgan Chase trading loss. Ruhle reported that Bruno Iksil, the London-based trader at JP Morgan, had amassed positions large enough to distort prices in the $10 trillion credit derivative market.

In June 2013, Ruhle wrote a provocative response to Paul Tudor Jones’ comments on women in trading for the Huffington Post that elicited responses from both the media and financial industries.

Prior to joining Bloomberg, Ruhle spent 14 years working in the finance industry. While in college, she spent a summer interning for Merrill Lynch. In 1997, she joined Credit Suisse where she spent six years working in hedge fund sales. During her time at Credit Suisse First Boston, she served as a vice president and became the highest producing credit derivatives salesperson in the United States. In 2003, Ruhle joined Deutsche Bank as a credit salesperson covering hedge funds. She ended her eight-year career there as a managing director in Global Markets Senior Relationship Management. While at Deutsche Bank, Ruhle founded the Global Market Women’s Network to help women move into leadership roles at the company.

Ruhle is also a columnist for Shape.com, the website for Shape magazine,. Ruhle was featured on the cover of Working Mother magazine in October 2012, as well as Fit Pregnancy on their April/May 2013 issue. She has also been profiled by 201 Magazine, Glass Hammer, IWantHerJob, and Business Insider.

Personal

Ruhle is a graduate of Lehigh University where she earned her bachelor’s degree in international business in 1997. Under her major, she studied in Guatemala, Italy, and Kenya.

Ruhle grew up in Park Ridge, New Jersey  and now lives in Manhattan with her husband and three children.

Ruhle founded the Corporate Investment Bank (CIB) Women's Network and co-chaired the Women on Wall Street (WOWS) steering committee. Ruhle is also a member of the board of trustees for Girls, Inc. New York and a former member of the iMentor Corporate Advisory Board. She is a member of 100 Women in Hedge Funds, The Women's Bond Club and a member of the corporate council of The White House Project, a not-for-profit organization working to advance women in business, government, and media. She also serves on the board and advises for React To Film, an issue-based documentary film series.


