
#Article: Ahmed Hussen
#Type: regular article

Ahmed Hussen (Axmed Xuseen, احمد حسين&lrm;; born 1975 or 1976) is a Somali-Canadian lawyer and political activist. He is the National President of the Canadian Somali Congress.

On October 19, 2015, Hussen was elected to the Canadian Parliament for the York South—Weston riding as a member of the Liberal Party of Canada.

Personal life

Hussen was raised in Somalia. He later moved to Toronto in 1993 as a 16 year old refugee, Canada in 1996, residing in Regent Park.

He completed his secondary school years in Hamilton. For his post-secondary studies, Hussen attended the city's York University. He earned a BA in History from the institution in 2002. Hussen later pursued a law degree at the University of Ottawa, successfully completing his bar exam in September 2012.

He is a father of two children.

Career

Hussen began his career in public service and politics in the fall of 2001. He started out doing volunteer work in Ontario's legislative assembly. He was hired the following year as an assistant to Dalton McGuinty, the leader of the province's official opposition. Hussen worked in this capacity until November 2003, when he was promoted to Special Assistant, concurrently with the Liberal Party's election victory. He held this new post for two years, during which he was in charge of issues management, policy and communications.

Hussen later worked with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police's Youth Engaged in National Security Issues committee.

He also founded the Regent Park Community Council. The representative body facilitated a $500 million revitalization and redevelopment project in Regent Park, the largest such initiative in the country. During the project's implementation, he was tasked with consulting with and protecting the interests of the area's 15,000 residents.

Hussen currently serves as the National President of the Canadian Somali Congress (CSC). Under his leadership, the CSC partnered with the Canadian International Peace Project and Canadian Jewish Congress to establish the Canadian Somali-Jewish Mentorship Project. It is the first national mentoring and development project between a sizable Muslim community and the Jewish community.

In May 2010, the Canadian Somali Congress and Canadian International Peace Project also partnered with the Global Enrichment Foundation to launch the Somali Women Scholarship Program. Hussen acts as the program's founding Director.

Until 2012, Hussen served as a sitting member of the Stephen Harper government's Cross-Cultural Roundtable on Security. Established in 2005, the panel brought together prominent members from a number of Canada's cultural communities and government officials in order to discuss policy and program issues, and to promote dialogue and strengthen understanding between the national authorities and its electorate.

As of April 2013, Hussen practises Criminal Law, Immigration and Refugee Law, and Human Rights Law at his office in Toronto.

In December 2014, he presented himself as a candidate for a Liberal Party of Canada seat in the riding of York South—Weston for the 42nd Canadian federal election. Hussen won the nomination in a field of six aspirants.Including that of the Green Party's John Johnson He is the first Somali-Canadian elected to the House of Commons.

Awards

Hussen has over the years received honours and recognition for his public work. In January 2004, the Toronto Star named him among the 10 individuals who have made significant contributions to Toronto in various fields, including community service, business, sports and science.

Hussen was also presented a Queen's Jubilee medal and the Ontario Non-Profit Housing Authority Award for his efficacious advocacy work in Regent Park.

Electoral record


