
#Article: Helge Seetzen
#Type: regular article

Helge Seetzen is a German technologist and businessman known for imaging & multimedia research and commercialization.

Seetzen was active in the development of high dynamic range imaging (HDR) technology  and several of his patents cover aspects of this technology. He won the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada 2009 Innovation Challenge Award for his work with HDR Technology.

Biography

Seetzen left his native Germany to study physics at the University of British Columbia in 1998.  He received BS and PhD degrees in physics and related disciplines from that university, where he first became active in imaging technology research that led to the development of HDR.

Business career

From 2002 to 2004, he was a co-founder and Director of Sunnybrook Technologies, a Vancouver-based start-up developing electronic display technologies. In 2004, thefirm split, and he became co-founder and Chief Technical Officer of BrightSide Technologies, a Vancouver-based developer of High dynamic range imaging-based electronic display technologies. After Brightside was purchased by Dolby Laboratories in 2007, he joined Dolby Canada Corp., becoming director of HDR Technology at Dolby from 2008 to 2010.

In early 2010, he founded Tandemlaunch Technologies, a Montreal-based technology transfer acceleration company that works with academic researchers to commercialize their technological developments. Seetzen is CEO and President of the firm, and directs the company’s strategy and operations.

Technical societies

Seetzen is the Chair of the Publications committee of the Society for Information Display, where he is responsible for the society’s publications including The Journal of the SID,, Information Display magazine, and related publications. He also served as the 2010 Program Chair and 2012 General Chair of Display Week, a technical symposium on displays. In 2012 he was elected as Secretary on the Executive of the Society for Information Display ,.

Publications

Seetzen’s work includes contributions to published research on high dynamic range display systems, High-Luminance HDR, and photometric image processing, and a of subjects related to image display, resolution, and luminance.


