
#Article: Nilesh Bhatt
#Type: regular article

Nilesh Bhatt, born March 17, 1971, is the Chief Executive Officer and chairman of Pilipili Entertainment Company Limited based in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. He is widely regarded as the most influential film executive in the East African film and movie industry, he is responsible for guiding the overall activities of the second largest film company in East Africa. 

Personal life

Mr. Nilesh is married and has 2 children, a son named Kush Bhatt and a daughter Paridhi Bhatt. He lives with the family in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

Early life

A graduate of Bhavan's College, Bombay University, Mr. Nilesh joined African Pride Textile Mills Ltd, a family business in 1997 as the Chief Executive officer. Under Mr. Nilesh’s direction, APTM became the industry’s most successful textile company in East Africa and India, leading the industry in market share for 16 consecutive years. During that time, he oversaw APTM’s rapid evolution from a junior company into a full-fledged textile company.  

Pilipili Entertainment

In 2006, Mr. Nilesh, alongside childhood friend Mr Sameer Srivastava founded Pilipili_entertainment, which became among the most successful film companies in East and Central Africa. While leading Pilipili_entertainment, Mr. Nilesh energized the company by attracting and recruiting many of the film industry’s most talented executives. With the acquisition of the world class equipment, Mr. Nilesh was directly involved with the restructuring and integration process to create the East Africa’s largest film company. Under his leadership, he has produced TV commercials, hundreds of movies and organized numerous big events.

Throughout his career, Mr. Nilesh has worked in many different capacities with some of the most popular and influential Africa’s and Bollywood’s artists, actors, producers and directors of the past four decades, including Steven Kanumba, Wema Sepetu, Mzee Chillo, Jackline Wolper, Jacob Steven and Rose Ndauka.


