
#Article: Priyanka Chaturvedi
#Type: regular article

Priyanka Chaturvedi (born 19 November 1979) is a Spokesperson of All India Congress Committee, a Presidium of Indian National Congress Party of India. She is also a columnist for Tehelka, Daily News and Analysis and First Post.

Personal life

Chaturvedi was born (19 November 1979 ) and raised in Mumbai. Her ancestors hails from Uttar Pradesh. She completed her primary education in St. Joseph's High School, Juhu in 1995 and then graduated in Commerce from Narsee Monjee College of Commerce and Economics, Vile Parle in 1999. She is married and has two children. She is avid reader and blogger.

Career

 Considering that India has a huge youth population it is absolutely important that they involve themselves actively in shaping not just their own future but that of the country too. —Priyanka Chaturvedi Chaturvedi started her career as Director of MPower Consultants, a Media, PR and event management company. She is Trustee of Prayas Charitable Trust which runs two schools to provide education to over 200 under-privileged kids. "Considering that India has a huge youth population it is absolutely important that they involve themselves actively in shaping not just their own future but that of the country too", says Chaturvedi. She exhorts that it is absolutely necessary that youths are aware of happenings around them at local level and national level. She says that youth should contribute to nation in whichever field they strongly believe in, not just political field but social field also. She joined Congress in 2010 and became General Secretary of Indian Youth Congress from North-West Mumbai in 2012. Chaturvedi has a significant presence on Twitter and is known for defending policies of ruling Congress party on Twitter. Because of this, in May 2013 Chaturvedi was elected as Spokesperson of AICC.

As a spokesperson of Congress Party, Chaturvedi often take part in political debates on TV News Channels. She is also member of 'Communication Department' headed by Randeep Surjewala and take part in political debates in Social Media. She is vociferous critic of Bhartiya Janta Party and its leader Narendra Modi. Following exchange of tweets between Chaturvedi and head of Twitter in India in April 2013, it was accused that head of Twitter in India has met members of social media wing of Congress party and Twitter is fixing India trends in favour of Congress party. Chaturvedi refuted the allegations as "case of sour grapes".


