
#Article: Matthew Hiltzik
#Type: regular article

Matthew Hiltzik (born May 12, 1972) is an American publicist and the founder of the strategic communications and consulting firm Hiltzik Strategies, which represents high-profile organizations and individuals.

Biography

Hiltzik was raised in Teaneck, New Jersey, and graduated from the Ramaz School. He attended the Cornell University School of Industrial and Labor Relations and then the Fordham University School of Law.

After law school, he worked as press secretary and deputy executive director of the New York State Democratic Committee, where he worked on the 1998 campaigns of Chuck Schumer and Eliot Spitzer and Hillary Clinton's Listening Tour in July 1999. In December 1999, Hiltzik joined Miramax as head of corporate communications, where he was involved in public relations for Miramax Films, Miramax Books, Miramax TV, Talk magazine, and philanthropic and political fundraising and crisis management while also serving as personal spokesman for Harvey Weinstein and the company.

In 2000, Hiltzik took a brief leave from the Weinsteins to re-join Hillary Clinton's campaign as the director of Jewish relations. He soon left politics to rejoin with the Weinstein brothers, after the brothers finalized their deal to leave Miramax. Hiltzik teamed up with the U.K.-based publicity company, Freud Communications, to start up their U.S. operations. He went out on his own in early 2008 to start up Hiltzik Strategies. Hiltzik maintains his political roots advising Jose Antonio Vargas's DefineAmerican campaign to elevate the national conversation about immigration policy and to pass the DREAM Act, and Thomas DiNapoli in his successful bid for New York State Comptroller.

He was executive producer of the documentary films Paper Clips and Holy Land Hardball;and co-produced the documentary Connected.He is also a contributor to the Jewish magazine Tablet.

==Personal life== Hiltzik was honored by the New York Board of Rabbis in 2012 for his work in the Jewish community.

In July 2015, the PR industry trade Everything-PR reported that Hiltzik was named to the board of directors of the New York City Economic Development Corporation a not-for-profit corporation that promotes economic growth throughout New York City. 

Hiltzik resides in New York City. He is married to wife Dana and has three children.


