
#Article: Jackie Trad
#Type: regular article

Jacklyn Anne "Jackie" Trad (born 25 April 1972) is an Australian politician. She has been Deputy Premier of Queensland since 2015 and has represented the Queensland Legislative Assembly seat of South Brisbane for the Australian Labor Party since the 2012 South Brisbane by-election.

Personal life and family

Trad is the second daughter of Lebanese immigrants; Lebanese Arabic was her first language. The family returned to Lebanon in 1979 to live in Beirut for one year where she attended the International College. Back in Australia, she attended Lourdes Hill College. She began an arts degree at Griffith University and completed a Master of Public Policy at the University of Sydney. She currently lives in South Brisbane with her husband and two children.

Political career

Trad was elected to the legislature at the South Brisbane by-election held on 28 April 2012. The by-election was held after the resignation of the previous Labor Party incumbent and former Premier Anna Bligh.

Trad has also held several positions within the structure of the Australian Labor Party. She was formerly the Queensland ALP assistant state secretary, president of the Kurilpa Branch, a delegate to the ALP National and State Conferences, member of the National Executive Committee and also the secretary of Labor Women's Organisation Queensland. Trad is a member of the ALP's left faction.

She is on the record as being a supporter of same-sex marriage, describing it in parliament as a "human right."

Shadow cabinet

On 29 April 2012, Opposition Leader Annastacia Palaszczuk appointed Trad as Shadow Minister for Transport and Main Roads, Environment and Heritage Protection, Small Business, Consumer Affairs and the Arts.

Palaszczuk Government

Following the Queensland state election on 31 January 2015, Trad became Deputy Premier of Queensland in the Palaszczuk Ministry on 14 February 2015.

In addition to being the Deputy Premier, Trad is also the Minister for Transport, Minister for Infrastructure, Local Government and Planning, and Minister for Trade.


