
#Article: Maruthi Dasari
#Type: regular article

Maruthi Dasari is an director, screenwriter, Film producer who works primarily in Telugu cinema. Well known for Directing low Budget film's like Ee Rojullo, Bus stop. Maruthi is associated with Maruthi Talkies, a film production house in South. Maruthi received the Best Debutant Director Award for Ee Rojullo at SIIMA Awards. He is specially known for his Adult humour dialogues.

Personal life

Maruthi was born in Machilipatnam, AndhraPradesh. He completed his education in Machilipatnam. Later Maruthi moved to Hyderabad after his graduation. He learnt animation and later joined DQ Entertainment International, where he was one of the first batch of animators in the city. He used to paint sign boards and numbers plates of vehicles to earn some money for his fees.

Career

Maruthi started his career as a co-producer for the film Premisthe, A film by arvindh. Later he entered into field of distribution and distributed several films. Then he started designing Ads & designs. At the time Chiranjeevi heard about him and asked him to design a flag for the Praja Rajyam Party and also an other promotional ads for the party.He has also gave a logo for Athadu flim. In 2011 Ram Gopal Varma made Dongala Mutha with 5D camera in a cheaper budget which was attracted by maruthi. He then decided to start a low Budget film and worked on the script. In 2012 with in a short span Ee Rojullo was released marking the debut of Maruthi. Upon the release Ee rojullo mostly gained positive response from the critic's. Made on a budget of 50lakhs It had collected more than 10crores the movie was one of the most successful Tollywood films in 2012.Later in November 2012 his second Directorial Venture Bus stop was released and declared as a Hit. In 2013 maruthi wrote and produced Prema Katha Chitram under Maruthi Talkies introducing his camera man J.Prabhakar Reddy as director. Prema Katha Chitram was a sudden hit by collecting a gross of 20 crores. He produced several films like Prema Katha Chitram, Romance, Mahesh, villa-2, Love U Bangaram, Green signal. His next film as Director is Kotha Janta starring Allu Sirish in lead role. His next venture with Venkatesh has been announced and titled as Radha.Regular shoot of this project starts in February 2014.His next Telugu project with Nani named Bhale Bhale Magadivoy has released and declared a hit.

Filmography


