
#Article: Josh James
#Type: regular article

Josh James is an American entrepreneur and founder and CEO of Domo, a software-as-a-service (SaaS) company he started in October 2010 to fix the fundamental problems he saw in the business intelligence market. He started the company as Shacho (which means CEO in Japanese) and two months later bought a company named Corda based in Lindon, Utah to jump start the visualization component of the product. In 2011, he rebranded Shacho to Domo, which means thank you in Japanese. As of April 15, he raised $450 million  in funding from Benchmark Capital, Blackrock, IVP, Greylock, GGV Capital, Founders Fund, T.Rowe Price and a number of other high-profile Silicon Valley venture capital firms and investors. He also is the founder of CEO.com, an online resource for CEO-related news and information.

James previously co-founded and served as CEO of Omniture, a web analytics company. On his 33rd birthday, James rang the bell of the NYSE as Omniture went public in 2006 and later sold the company to Adobe in 2009 for USD $1.8 billion. From 2006 to 2009, the three years that Omniture was public, James was the youngest CEO of a Nasdaq or New York Stock Exchange-traded company. Omniture was one of the top performing IPOs in 2006 and the number one returning venture investment out of 1,008 venture capital investments in 2004. James served as Senior Vice President and General Manager of the Omniture Business Unit at Adobe until July 2010.

In 2012, Mountain West Capital Network named James its Entrepreneur of the Year.  On June 27, 2012, James and Domo, Inc. received the Utah Valley Business Q "2012 UV50 TOP 10 Startups To Watch" award. James was featured as #26 on Fortune 40 under 40 in 2009 and #1 on Fortune 40 under 40 "Ones to Watch" in 2011. He received the 2006 Ernst & Young Entrepreneur of the Year Award and was named Technology Entrepreneur of the Decade by Brigham Young University. He was also recognized as Mountain West Capital's 2012 Entrepreneur of the Year. On November 30, 2012, James was inducted into the Utah Technology Hall of Fame along with Fred Lampropoulous, founder of Merit Medical Systems.

James maintains a list of entrepreneurial advice for startup companies.

He serves as a Young Global Leader with the World Economic Forum. He also serves on the board of Rakuten, a publicly traded, five billion dollar revenue company that is one of largest e-commerce companies in Japan.

Before co-founding Omniture James co-founded an interactive agency and two other businesses, which were subsequently sold to WebMediaBrands (formerly known as Jupitermedia) and Verisign.James founded Silicon Slopes, a private-sector initiative that promotes the interests of the high-tech industry in Utah. He attended Brigham Young University into his senior year, but did not graduate.

James is the oldest of six children. His father was an airline pilot and colonel in the Marines. He moved 17 times growing up. James served a two-year mission in Tokyo for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He had roles as a child actor, which included appearing in episodes of Touched by an Angel and in a Kellogg's Honey Smacks commercial. He is the brother of Zach James, co-founder of MovieClips 


