
#Article: Luisa Zissman
#Type: regular article

Luisa Christina Zissman  (born Louisa Christina Kalozois; 4 June 1987) is an English retail entrepreneur and reality television personality. She was the runner-up on the ninth series of The Apprentice and appeared in Celebrity Big Brother 13.

Early life and education

Zissman was born in Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire to a Greek father and educated at Northampton School for Girls.

Career

Her first employment was at an estate agent on Saturdays which she took at 16 to pay the upkeep costs for a horse her parents bought for her. One of her first post-school jobs was at Electronic Data Systems, but she later stated that she decided to go into business due to disliking being employed and being told what to do.

Based in St. Albans, Hertfordshire, she owns her own baking website, eBay electronics business and cupcake shop  -  Dixie's Cupcakery, named after her daughter. Although she claimed on several occasions that these three businesses have a net worth of £1.5 million, The Independent valued the three businesses, all trading names of Boutique Trading Ltd of which Zissman is listed as director and company secretary, at £194. They also noted that the eBay electronics store she owned was a "one-stop shop for several sellers, including electronics, baking and beauty products".

Zissman came to public attention when she appeared on the ninth series of The Apprentice in 2013, where she was runner up. In November 2013 she launched her business, named Bakers Toolkit, at the Cake International Show. Earlier, there had been some debate about whether the name should include an apostrophe. She joined the thirteenth series of Celebrity Big Brother on 3 January 2014. She finished fourth overall behind Jim Davidson, Dappy and Ollie Locke. She has since appeared on Reality Bites.

Personal life

She is divorced from her first husband, entrepreneur Oliver Zissman who co-founded Totally Fitness, a gym equipment rental business with his brother; the couple have a daughter who was born in 2010. While on Celebrity Big Brother, she revealed that she is bisexual, and had sought treatment for sex addiction. Zissman married Irish businessman Andrew Collins in France in July 2015.


