
#Article: Matt Ehrlichman
#Type: regular article

 

Matt Ehrlichman, born June 20, 1979, in Seattle, Washington, is a serial start-up entrepreneur, currently the CEO and co-founder of Porch. 

History of start-ups

When Ehrlichman was 21 years old, he raised $250,000 from a handful of Puget Sound-area investors to launch Thriva LLC, which, in 2004, would become a 20-person software company that developed software to help organizations run sporting camps and summer camps by tracking applicant forms and registrations online.  One of Thriva's most noteworthy clients was the San Francisco Giants organization, with Thriva setting up the front-end application and registration system for the team's summer baseball leagues for children. Some 2,000 people signed up for the Giants' program in 2003.  At Thriva, Ehrlichman's management hierarchy was described as "loose and informal".

By 2007, Ehrlichman had grown his company to 65 employees and more than 1,000 customers, at which point he and his partner sold Thriva to San Diego-based The ACTIVE Network for $60 million.  Ehrlichman would join Active Network as chief strategy officer.  Active Network would go public in 2011 with an initial public offering that put the company's value at $877 million.  Two years later, the company was sold to Vista Equity Partners for $1.05 billion.

On September 17, 2012, Ehrlichman launched to the public Porch, a visual web platform (like Pinterest) that focuses on home-improvement projects. Home builders, contractors, and service providers can create free profiles on the site, or pay to drive extra traffic their way.  Porch was funded with money from angel investors Geoff Entress of Seattle and Ron Conway of Silicon Valley, among others, with $6.25 million in cash.  Porch vets the service providers listed on the site, and it guarantees its recommendations to customers.

Ehrlichman advises business start-ups to "have a fun team that plays jokes around the office" and "make sure you like your co-founders."

Family

Matt Ehrlichman is married and has two children.  His grandfather was John Ehrlichman, White House counsel in the Nixon Administration.

See also

	 Entrepreneurship

	 Dot-com company


