
#Article: Andrian Candu
#Type: regular article

Andrian Candu (born November 27, 1975, in Chișinău, Moldova) is a Moldovan politician who is currently serving as the Speaker of the Parliament of Moldova. Before that, Candu was a Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Economy of the Republic of Moldova since July 2, 2014, and was Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Moldova.

Education

	 High-school studies: September 1991 - June, 1994, “T. Popovici” Computer Science High-School, (Cluj-Napoca, Romania). High-school diploma. 

	 University studies: In September 1994, he was enrolled at the “Babes-Bolay” University in Cluj, Romania, department of law, where he was awarded a Bachelor diploma in June 1998. 

	 Master’s degree studies: during September 2007 and June 2008, at the Vienna University of Economics and Business Administration, Institute for Austrian and International Tax Law, (Vienna, Austria) postgraduate International Tax Law Program, where he was awarded a Master’s Diploma.

== Other studies == 

	 2001 - certificate of participation in “Human rights and the implementation program” at Birmingham Institute of European Law, Birmingham, United Kingdom

	 2001 - certificate of participation in Venice Commission course “Public Administration and the Individual from the European Convention of Human Rights” at UniDem (University for Democracy) seminar in Trieste, Italy

	 2002 - certificate of participation in Human Rights International Academy at the Western Cape University, Robben Island, Cape Town, South Africa

Professional activities

	 from August 1998 - November 2002 - Senior Consultant in the Committee for Foreign Affairs Policy, (Parliament of the Republic of Moldova).

	 from 2000-2004 - Lector at the Academy of Public Administration of the President of the Republic of Moldova.

	 from 2001-2002 - Lawyer at the Compudava LLC, Moldo&British Joint venture company.

	 from 2002-2003 - CEO of Isimbardi International LLC Moldo&Italian Joint venture company.

	 from November 2002 - August 2010 - PricewaterhouseCoopers Moldova (Senior Manager, Head of the Moldovan Office), where he was responsible for managing a wide range of projects in the field of taxation of natural and legal persons, consultancy in the taxation of expatriates, legal counseling and other activities. He was also involves cooperating and negotiating with the Moldovan Authorities in the field of improving the legislation related to the business environment, especially in the tax legislation field on the possibility to retrieve the VAT, deducting expenses, loss reporting etc.

	 from 2010 - Chairman of the Administrative Council of Moldova Business People Association (MBPA) & appointed Director General of the Prime Management Company, where he was leader of a team responsible for managing several companies running different kinds of businesses, such as: financial and banking, real estate, media, hotel keeping and services.

	 from November 2010 - Memmber of the Parliament of Moldova & member of the Parliamentary Committee on Legal issues, Appointments and Immunities.

	 from May 2013 - Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Moldova.

	 from July 2014 - Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Economy of the Republic of Moldova.

	 from January 2015 - Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Moldova.

Family

Andrian Candu is married and has two children.

Links

	 Adrian Candu Blog

	 Adrian Candu's Biography on the site of the Parliament of Moldova

	 Adrian Candu Biography


