
#Article: Reshmin Chowdhury
#Type: regular article

Reshmin Chowdhury (রেশমিন চৌধুরী; born 16 December 1977) is an English sports journalist and broadcaster who works for the BBC and BT Sport.

Early life

Chowdhury was born and bought up in London, England and is of Bangladeshi origin. With both parents active in the local community, Chowdhury was immersed in Bengali music and culture from a young age.

Chowdhury attended Woodford County High School for Girls. In 2000, she graduated with a BSc (Hons) in Politics with Economics from the University of Bath. In 2003, she studied for an NCTJ Post-Graduate Diploma in Newspaper Journalism at Harlow College.

Broadcasting career

From 1998 to 1999, whilst studying for her degree, Chowdhury spent her placement year as a television news helpdesk operator at Reuters TV News. She joined Princess Productions after graduating and was part of the original team that travelled to Borneo for the ITV1 programme Survivor in 2001, before working as UK Editor for the global online events guide whatsonwhen.com. In late 2003, she was offered a job travelling around the world producing specialist business reports for international print media, interviewing heads of states, politicians and business figures. Her work took her as far afield as Madagascar, Dubai, Greece, South Africa, Maldives and Nigeria.

In mid-2005, Chowdhury moved to television news and joined ITN as a news assistant and then producer, before moving to BBC London, BBC News and Bloomberg Television. From September 2008, she spent two seasons as a presenter and reporter with Real Madrid TV. She was the first journalist to interview Cristiano Ronaldo following his world-record signing for Real Madrid. She also secured the world exclusive with Karim Benzema who she interviewed in French. Her work included match day reporting, post-match interviews, travelling with the team, news presenting, as well as producing and presenting shows such as RealMadrid Life and Top Goals.

In May 2010, Chowdhury left Madrid and joined the BBC Sport News team in London just as the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa was kicking off. She broadcasts as a sports presenter for the BBC News Channel in the UK and BBC World, the latter for whom she worked for throughout the London 2012 Olympics.

In August 2014, Chowdhury also joined the BT Sport team as presenter of their nightly news round-up show SportsHUB Late.

Singing career

Chowdhury has also worked as a professional vocalist, having performed across the UK and abroad since the age of five. More recently, she worked alongside musician Nitin Sawhney. She performed in the UK touring theatre production of The Mahabharata and recorded vocals on the 2006 film The Namesake.

Awards and nominations

In 2013, Chowdhury was nominated for a media award sponsored by fc business magazine at the Asian Football Awards.

Personal life

Chowdhury lives in London with her husband and two children and is a Tottenham Hotspur Football Club fan. She is fluent in English and Bengali and also speaks Spanish and French.

See also

	British Bangladeshi

	List of British Bangladeshis


