
#Article: Peggy Cabral
#Type: regular article

Alba María Antonia Cabral Cornero (born 26 June 1947), known as Peggy, is a Dominican journalist, television host, politician and diplomat. Since 2013, she is co-president of the Dominican Revolutionary Party, and was vice-mayor of the National District (1998-2002). She is José Francisco Peña Gómez's widow.

Early life and family

Peggy is daughter of the Argentine journalist of Spanish descent Alba María Cornero, a native of Rosario, and the Dominican writer and diplomat Manuel del Cabral; she was born in Buenos Aires while her father was serving in the Embassy of the Dominican Republic to Argentina.

Cabral comes from a prominent political family in the Dominican Republic, which has had several presidents, including Buenaventura Báez, Ramón Báez, José María Cabral, Marcos Cabral, and Donald Reid-Cabral. Her grandfather,  Mario Fermín Cabral y Báez drafted the bill that in 1935 renamed the Dominican capital, Santo Domingo, for Trujillo City in honor of dictator Rafael Trujillo.

In the late 1950s her father defected to Argentina and received political asylum, where the Cabral family lived for 17 years before returning to the Dominican Republic, except for a sister of Peggy who remained in Argentina.

She married young to Diego Fidel Raúl Degaudenzi, an Argentine doctor, with whom she had three children, who have given to them twelve grandchildren. Degaudenzi and Cabral divorced. Cabral remarried on 19 December 1986 to the Dominican politician José Francisco Peña Gómez, whom she’s widow. She studied business administration at the University of Buenos Aires. During her youth she lived in Argentina, Spain, Chile and Brazil.

TV and political career

En la televisión dominicana ha sido presentadora del programa Conversando con Peggy Cabral, en el que ha entrevistado a destacadas figuras como Hugo Chávez, Benazir Bhutto, Mahmoud Abbas, Fidel Castro, y Michel Martelly.

She was the Dominican Revolutionary Party candidate for the senate seat of the San Cristóbal province to the congressional elections in 2010, she got 41.07% of the votes, being defeated by the incumbent Tommy Galán.

In August 2013 was designated acting president of the Dominican Revolutionary Party.

In late 2015, Cabral was appointed Dominican Republic ambassador to Italy.

Awards and honours

She has received several awards throughout her life, including:

	 Llaves de la ciudad de Paterson, New Jersey

	 Medalla al Mérito en el Renglón Político, impuesta por el entonces presidente de la República Dominicana, Hipólito Mejía

	 Orden de Don José Solano y Bote (Venezuela)

	 Huésped de Honor de las ciudades de La Plata y Rosario (Argentina)

	 Personaje del año 2003 (Movimiento Cultural Dominicano)


