
#Article: Ivan Vrdoljak
#Type: regular article

Ivan Vrdoljak (born 22 june 1972) is a Croatian politician, engineer and current minister at Ministry of Economy at the Cabinet of Zoran Milanović. He is member of the Croatian People's Party - Liberal Democrats.

Early life and education

Ivan Vrdoljak was born in on June 22, 1972 in Osijek, where he finished elementary school, gymnasium (Specialized in Mathematics-Informatics education) and the Faculty of Electrical Engineering, where he graduated in electrical engineering. Vrdoljak also studied at the Academy for Political Development, Croatian branch of the Council of Europe from 2000-2005.

He is a member of the Croatian Hunting Association (Lovački savezi Hrvatske) and Hunting Club Mursa (Lovačko društvo Mursa). He actively plays football.

Working experience

After the graduation he started to work for RPM Engeharia company in Brazil as a designer in AutoCAD computer program. He later came back to Croatia and worked in "Nova livana" company in Osijek as an engineer trainee in automation. He then transferred to a company "Neo inžinjering" where he became a project manager in the process automation and management. In 2001 he together with his associates founded company "ATO inžinjering" in Osijek, where he was the director.

Political career

Ivan Vrdoljak become secretary of the Croatian People's Party (HNS) branch in Osijek in 2000 and a member of the Croatian People's Party Osijek-Baranja County council. A year later he was elected member of the Central Board of HNS, and in 2002 President of the HNS Osijek branch. In 2004 he was elected to the position of a HNS Chairman of the Slavonia and Baranja Regional Alliance, and also as a councilor in Osijek-Baranja County Assembly. In 2006 he was elected as a councilor in Osijek City Council. In the Osijek elections in 2008 the coalition HNS-HSU-Green party won around 9% of the votes under his leadership. He served as deputy mayor of the city of Osijek in charge of social affairs and the economy after he formed a coalition with 2008 elections winners. As of 2011, he is the Minister of Economy in the centre-left Cabinet of Zoran Milanović.


