
#Article: Eyal Ofer
#Type: regular article

Eyal Ofer (born 1950) is a Monaco-based Israeli real estate and shipping magnate as well as a major philanthropist. He is the chairman of Ofer Global, Zodiac Maritime Ltd and Global Holdings. He has supported an array of artistic and education projects through the Eyal Ofer Family Foundation.

Early life

Eyal Ofer was born in 1950 in Haifa, Israel. His father, Sammy Ofer, was a Romanian-born Israeli shipping magnate and Israel's richest man. He graduated from Atlantic College, an international boarding school affiliated with the United World Colleges, based in St Donat's Castle, Wales. In his teenage years, he spent summers working on the family company's ships, loading cargo, scraping the boats' sides and repainting them, as well as traveling to international ports.

He served as an intelligence officer in the Israeli Air Force from 1967 to 1973. He then studied Law in London.

Career

Eyal Ofer’s business interests are concentrated in shipping, cruise lines and global real estate within the Ofer Global group, a Monaco-based private company focused on shipping, real estate, banking and investments in Europe, North America, and Asia.

According to Forbes, Eyal Ofer has a net worth of $8.7 billion, as of March 2015.

In 2014, he received an honorary lifetime membership of the Baltic Exchange in London in recognition of his contribution to shipping in the UK and global maritime trade. Other recipients of this award have included the Duke of Edinburgh, Winston Churchill, and Maersk Mc-Kinney.

Later that year, Lloyd’s List named him number seven of the top 10 most influential people in the shipping industry.

He is a frequent speaker at key industry events and spoke at the Milken Institute Global Conference in 2012, 2013 and 2015.

Property

Eyal Ofer first moved to New York City in 1980 to start the family real estate business and invested in properties on Park Avenue South, which he rented to law firms and public relations firms through his real estate company, Miller Global Properties. He still serves as its co-Chairman. He also served as Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Deerbrook Limited from 1991 to 2011. 

Eyal Ofer is the Chairman of Global Holdings, a private real estate holding company specializing in large-scale commercial real estate and high-end residential developments. Its holdings include prime commercial properties in New York City’s Manhattan and a controlling stake in Miller Global Properties, LLC, a large real estate investment fund focusing on key markets in North America and Europe. Its commercial projects include, among others, 120 Park Avenue - the former headquarters of the Altria Group.

Its residential projects include 15 Central Park West, which was described as “the most powerful apartment building in the world” and “the most lucrative”, with quoted apartment sales of approximately $2 billion. It was the subject of a book published in March 2014 by Michael Gross entitled "House of Outrageous Fortune: Fifteen Central Park West, the World’s Most Powerful Address".

They also include the development at The Greenwich Lane (in partnership with the Rudin family - formerly the site of Saint Vincent's Catholic Medical Center), together with the redevelopment of 18 Gramercy Park South, 520 Park Avenue and 50 United Nations Plaza (all in partnership with Zeckendorf Development). 18 Gramercy Park South and 15 Central Park West were designed by architect Robert A. M. Stern. 50 UN Plaza is a 44-story tower designed by London-based architects Foster and Partners.

Shipping

Eyal Ofer started his career in shipping in the 1980s.

He is the Chairman of Zodiac Maritime Ltd, a privately held London-based shipping company with a fleet of more than 130 vessels. It is the largest operator of vessels under the Red Ensign by tonnage.  He is the principal of OMNI Offshore Terminals, the largest provider of floating production storage and offloading (FSO & FPSO) assets to the offshore oil and gas industry. Founded 26 years ago, the Singapore-headquartered company has delivered 23 conversion projects, 2 FPSO and 21 FSO. He has been a Director of Royal Caribbean Cruises since May 1995 and holds a significant stake in the company.

Philanthropy

Eyal Ofer is a supporter of artistic, educational and cultural institutions - including the Tate Modern and the National Maritime Museum in the UK - through the Eyal Ofer Family Foundation, which continues his family’s philanthropic tradition.

He was one of the donors to the Gloriana during the Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II in 2012.

In 2013, he donated £10 million to Tate Modern, a museum of modern art based in London. As a result, the exhibition gallery on the third floor bears his name.

In December 2013, Eyal Ofer donated £1.5m to the National Maritime Museum to allow it to keep two 18th century George Stubbs paintings (Portrait of a Large Dog and The Kongouro from New Holland) in the UK after a public appeal by David Attenborough.

Personal life

He is married with four children. They reside in Monte Carlo, Monaco. In 2008, they resided in west London and had a home in Herzliya Pituah near Tel Aviv. He also owns an apartment at 15 Central Park West, a building he developed located on the Upper West Side of Manhattan in New York City. He has built up a significant collection of contemporary and modern art, having also inherited half of his father's "vast collection".


