
#Article: Paquito Diaz
#Type: regular article

Francisco Bustillos Diaz (May 28, 1937 - March 3, 2011), better known by his screen name Paquito Diaz, was a veteran Filipino actor and movie director. He specialized in action and comedy.

Biography

Early life and career

Diaz was born in Arayat, Pampanga, Philippines to his parents Silvino and Maria Diaz also he has eight siblings (Romy Diaz, and Margarita Dailig of Guam). He was famous for his villain roles, either as the main, supporting or comic relief and he was one of the most popular actors in film industry, although he also had the ability to portray protagonist roles, mostly supporting, or comic relief (with his longtime friend, the late Fernando Poe Jr.. 

Among the memorable non-villain roles he portrayed were in "Walang Matigas Na Tinapay sa Mainit na Kape" and "Ang Dalubhasa" (without his moustache) where his late younger brother, Romy played the main villain of the film. Other non-villain appearances include: Eagle Squad, where he played a dedicated and good police officer alongside Robin Padilla, Current Senator Jinggoy Estrada, Edu Manzano, with Jaime Fabregas as the main antagonist; Bayadra (a parody of Viagra) Brothers alongside Jimmy Santos and the late Berting Labra; Estudyante Blues as the father of the character of his son Joko, and Pera O Bayong as Don Juanito Starring Willie Revillame, John Estrada and Randy Santiago with Mark Gil as the right-hand man of his character and the main antagonist of that film.

He also appeared in villain roles in comedy films as the main antagonist and also in supporting/non-villain roles that stars mostly Dolphy, Redford White, Vic Sotto, Joey De Leon, Jimmy Santos and the late actors Chiquito, Babalu, Panchito and Rene Requiestas. 

Paquito also gained popularity in the '90s where he played title roles in two comedy flicks: "Daddy Goon" (touted as his launching movie) where he was ably supported by Herbert Bautista, Manilyn Reynes, Eddie Gutierrez (villain) and child wonder Aiza Seguerra; and "The Good, The Bad and The Ugly" where he shared stellar billing with matinee idol Gabby Concepcion and box-office comedian Rene Requiestas. He also tried his hand in producing a movie in 2002 via "Mga Batang Lansangan... Ngayon" which starred his son Joko Diaz and matinee idol Bobby Andrews.

He suffered from hemorrhagic stroke in 2002 and died last March 3, 2011 due to pneumonia complications.

Personal life

His father was an American citizen of Mexican descent. His brother, Romy Diaz, his wife Nena Diaz with children Joko and Cheska are also actors. Before he became an actor, he was a basketball player with his brother Romy Diaz suited up with the FEU Tamaraws in the early 1960s.

Sickness

After suffering from hypertension and stroke, which at one time left him comatose, he had to sell the family house and lot including his car. His vision was impaired for the same health reasons. He was diagnosed with pneumonia and infection due to sepsis(source: http://www.abs-cbnnews.com/video/entertainment/02/15/11/wife-ailing-paquito-diaz-seeks-aid).

Filmography

Movies


