
#Article: Gopal Krishna Nayak
#Type: regular article

Dr. Gopal Krishna Nayak, Professor of Information Systems at XIMB. He is currently the director of IIIT Bhubaneswar. Prof. Nayak is an electrical engineer from IIT Kharagpur with a Masters in Business Administration (MBA) from IIM Bangalore. He has done his PhD from IIT Kharagpur under the guidance of Prof. Damodar Acharya who was the Vice-Chancellor of BPUT, Chairman of AICTE and the Director of IIT Kharagpur.

He has worked in companies such as Nelco, Mumbal and NTPC Delhi in fields of Power Electronics Design and Supply Chain Management respectively. He joined XIMB soon after finishing MBA from IIM Bangalore. He taught subjects in Information Systems, Operations Management and Quantitative Analysis. He was responsible for giving a technology focus to the curriculum at XIMB. He held positions of Dean (Academics), Admissions Coordinator, Computing Services Coordinator etc.

When the IIIT in Bhubaneswar started in 2007, He was invited to be the first Director of the Institute. Under his stewardship, this Institute has been growing rapidly in terms of Infrastructure, Programmes being offered and Research.

He is an advisor to the Government of Odisha on all e-Governance projects. He is advisor to the Treasury, Commercial Taxes, IDCO, BDA and many other Odisha Government Initiatives.

Research Interests

	 ERP and Enterprise Systems

	 Group Decision Support Systems

	 Knowledge Management

	 e-governance

Software Development

His hobby is part-time programming. Various products have emerged from this hobby.

	 Hibiscus - Open Source Academic Information System. This system is in use in XIMB for more than 15 years. Important institutions such as XLRI, IIM Ranchi, Ravenshaw University, GIM Goa, ILS Bhubaneswar have adopted this software for managing and knowledge sharing in their Institutes.

	 PAMIS - Project based Accounting system. This software has been adopted by the Panchyati Raj Department of Government of Odisha and is used to manage accounts of three tier panchayat system : 30 DRDAs, 314 Blocks, and above 6000 Panchyats.

	 EOL - Examination On-Line. In any educational institutions, apart from teaching, performance assessment and evaluation is one of the major challenges. Learning is enhanced through timely and frequent feedback. Most teachers would find the Performance Evaluation tedious and monotonous. EOL is a solution for the performance evaluation woes of the teachers and students. This web based tool gives complete control to the teacher to build his question bank, design quizzes and examinations and administer the quiz over the Internet and publish results.

Administrative Responsibilities

Present Responsibilities

	 Director, IIIT Bhubaneswar

	 Vice-President, BMMA

	 Technology Adviser (XIMB)

	 Director, IDCOL software Limited

	 Director, OCAC

	 Adviser, Commercial Tax Department, Govt of Orissa

	 Adviser, Panchyati Raj Department, Govt of Orissa

Former Responsibilities

	 Director, KIIT 2005-2006

	 Dean, academic, XIMB 1999-2002

	 Coordinator, Admissions, XIMB 1995-1999

	 Coordinator, Information Systems Area, XIMB 1994-2002

	 General Chair ICIT 2008

See also

	 IIIT Bhubaneswar

	 XIMB


