
#Article: Irene Molloy
#Type: regular article

Irene Molloy (born 1978 as Irene Theresa Molloy in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania) is an American actress, singer and songwriter. She is best known for her main role as Hunter Fallow/Becky Johnson in The WB's short-lived but critically acclaimed comedy series Grosse Pointe from 2000 to 2001. She has also starred in Broadway and Off-Broadway musicals, television series and movies. Molloy was nominated for a Helen Hayes Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Musical and received an Outer Critics Circle Award nomination for Outstanding Featured Actress in a Musical.

Early life

Molloy, born December 13, 1978 in Doylestown, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, is an American actress and singer/songwriter. Born to a computer analyst and a neo-natal nurse, she is the eldest of five sisters. She's of Irish and Filipino roots. Molloy has appeared and sung, belting out show tunes in several community theatres, church basements and hymns on Sundays, like a lot of little kids in Philly's northern suburbs, before she has starred in Broadway and Off-Broadway musicals, television series and movies. A 1996 graduate of Archbishop Wood Catholic High School in Warminster, Pennsylvania. After graduating, she moved to New York City in 1996 and started working as a waitress there. But after catching the ear of Andrew Lloyd Webber, she left theatre and wedding singing behind to take her chances in showbiz.

Career

1996-99: Theatre plays and Story of a Bad Boy

From her hometown of Philadelphia, Irene Molloy is creating a buzz with her live performances. By 18, she had been a soloist on some pretty famous stages including Philadelphia's Academy of Music and London's Palladium. A graduate of Musicians' Institute in Los Angeles, she has already performed her original music in venues such as L.A.'s Genghis Cohen and NYC's Acme Underground. Molloy started a music career with classical training and performances on Broadway but says in a recent interview that with her original music it felt right to connect with the audience in a more intimate way. She first started as a theatre artist starring as Swallow in the 1996's play Whistle Down the Wind and as Sarah McEwen in the 1999's play The Civil War at the age of 23. She also played the leading role Juliet in the famous play Romeo & Juliet in 1999. Caused of the mixed reviews of the play at its time, Molloy didn't make it on the Broadway. After moving to Hollywood in 1999, she then gained her first television role in the 1999's gay-themed movie Story of a Bad Boy.

2000-04: Grosse Pointe and Andy Richter Controls the Universe

Between 2000 and 2004, Molloy starred in two comedy series. She first starred in Grosse Pointe as Hunter Fallow/Becky Johnson on The WB, which first and only season ran between 2000 and 2001. After the show ended, she gained a role as a main character in the TV series Andy Richter Controls the Universe as Wendy McKay on FOX, which two seasons aired from 2002 to 2004. Though minor successes, the shows were critically acclaimed.

2005-06: Launch of Musical Career

After that Molloy put her acting career on hold to focus more on her music career, when she released two musical projects Irene Molloy and Live at the Tin Angel. Her very first single "Maybe" won first place in the MakeaStar.com competition.

2007-13: Return to Stage and Live Performances

In 2007, Molloy returned to the stage, she was seen Off Broadway at the Atlantic Theater in the play 10 Million Miles as Molly alongside Matthew Morrison, directed by Michael Mayer. She recently tours with her Acoustic/Folk band, known for her powerful live performances at venues like Tin Angel and a sold-out crowd for the Best of Philly Rising show at the World Cafe Live Downstairs. She can also be heard on WXPN 88.5 as a featured artist. Inspired by singer-songwriters like Joni Mitchell, Ani DiFranco and especially Patty Griffin, Irene spent time learning to write songs to find her own sound after years of experience singing various styles and genres. Other influences include Tori Amos, Edie Brickell, Liz Phair, Lori McKenna and Cassandra Wilson.

2014-Present: Return to Music with County Line

Soulful vocals, delicate lyrics and genuine songs make Molloy’s first full-length album, called County Line, shine. An energetic Americana album with pop and country influences, it is pure and emotional. Produced by Phil D'Agostino, Chris Kasper, Hezekiah Jones and Andrew Lipke, Molloy’s tender voice, sophistication and excellent musicianship are highlighted throughout these carefully crafted, catchy songs with crossover appeal, combining the raw emotion of Patty Griffin with the vocal ease of Brandi Carlile. On this uplifting album that asks honest questions of the heart Molloy says she's grateful she took the risk because it feels right to connect with people through these songs and stories and in her own words. The songs "Butterflies" and "Red teacup" have been released out of the album.

Artistry

The songs of Molloy's releases can be described as a mix of Folk, Acoustic with pop music. Her first full release County Line is an energetic Americana album with pop and country influences, it is pure and emotional. According to Molloy, her music is influenced by Joni Mitchell, Tori Amos, Ani DiFranco, Edie Brickell, Liz Phair, Lori McKenna and Cassandra Wilson. Molloy's role model is Patty Griffin. Her original songs have been described as raw and perfectly soulful and her voice has been called emotional yet controlled stellar with stunning range and a signature sound.

Personal life

Molloy keeps her personal life in privacy. In February 2015, She married and has a child, the daughter Nia Molloy, born in 2004. Molloy loves sports like wandering, camping, travelling and yoga. Molloy plays the guitar.

Discography

Studio albums

Live albums

	2006: Live at the Tin Angel

EPs

	1999: Romeo & Juliet

	2006: Irene Molloy

Singles

Other appearances

Filmography

Film

Television

Theatre

Tours

	Irene Molloy Tour (2006-2008)

	County Line Tour (2014-2015)

Awards and nominations


