
#Article: Emmanuel Lemelson
#Type: regular article

Emmanuel Lemelson (born Gregory M. Lemelson) is a Greek Orthodox priest, cultural leader, social activist and investment manager who has gained notability for advocating a philosophy of investment based on Christian ethics.  He is the chief investment officer of Lemelson Capital Management, the sole sponsor and general partner of The Amvona Fund, LP, which several times has been named the world's top performing hedge fund according to financial media outlets The Wall Street Journal, Barron's, BarclayHedge and Prequin.

Lemelson’s position on ecumenism and the role of the Orthodox Church have been cited in The Washington Post, CBS News, Fox News and The Boston Herald. His investment research and analysis has been cited regularly in The Wall Street Journal, USA Today, New York Post, Fox Business Network, and TheStreet.com and credited with influencing share prices in publicly traded companies.

Lemelson is also the founder of The Lantern Foundation, which focuses on supporting religious, charitable and educational causes with a special focus on those associated with the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople.

Early life and education

Lemelson was born Gregory M. Lemelson in Phoenix, Arizona, the son of Larry R. and Katerina C. Lemelson. He attended Geschwister-Scholl-Schule in Tübingen, Germany and then Mercer Island High School in Mercer Island, Washington, where he graduated in 1993.

Lemelson attended Seattle University, where he received a Bachelor of Arts in Theology and Religious Studies in 1999, and then Hellenic College Holy Cross Greek Orthodox School of Theology, where he received a Master's of Divinity.

While an undergraduate at Seattle University, Lemelson met Jesuit Fr. Robert Spitzer, SJ, a prominent Jesuit philosopher and former President of Gonzaga University. Lemelson says that the encounter was a "moment of violent collision of secular conquests with God’s will," and that it proved influential in the development of his theological career.

Business career

Early business career

In 1994, Lemelson, then known as Gregory Lemelson, began a retail photo business as an undergraduate student at Seattle University. Later, also as a Seattle University student, he founded Amvona, an online retail website. The company, whose name is derived from the Greek word for “pulpit,” went on to generate $40 million in revenue.

In 1999, Lemelson launched Amvona.com. In 2005, based in part on proprietary software the company developed, the site began a transition to a hybrid platform of social networking and ecommerce content. By 2007, Lemelson developed technology to link media creation to relevant products using exif data and aggregating shared images of the site’s users as a prototype first known as “Amvona Trails” and later rebranded as the independent website Flekt.  By the end of 2012, the same technology was being used in the tracking of user activities by Facebook and other social media outlets.

Lemelson later added a news and analysis content outlet for the site focused on issues of faith, technology, economics and investing.

Investor activism

In September 2012, Lemelson founded Lemelson Capital Management, LLC, the sole sponsor and general partner of The Amvona Fund, L.P., a hedge fund that focuses on deep value and special situations. Since its inception, Lemelson has served as the fund's chief investment officer. The fund had been named three times in 2013-14 by Barron's as one of the world's top performing hedge funds. In May 2013, Lemelson Capital Management was ranked by Morningstar in the top one percent of its peer group in its "U.S. Long/Short Equity" category. In 2014, the fund was named by Preqin as one of the world's top performing event-driven hedge funds. From its September 2012 inception through May 2014, the fund returned a compounded annual gain of 85.15 percent and an overall gain of 193.65 percent.

Lemelson also has gained notability for his analysis of equities, which has moved share prices in several publicly traded companies.  On March 17, 2014 and again on April 8, 2014, for instance, Lemelson published analysis that World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) was substantially overvalued and should be shorted. His analysis was credited by USA Today, The Street, Seeking Alpha and other media outlets with an $800 million drop in the market capitalization of the stock between March 18 and April 20, 2014.

On May 16, 2014, following a $1.4 billion (63 percent) loss in WWE's market capitalization since Lemelson Capital Management's initial March 17, 2014 short call, the firm announced that it had reversed its short position and was now long WWE stock. Simultaneously, the firm called for the replacement of WWE's executive management team or a sale of the company. This followed what Lemelson Capital Management said was "a period of ongoing losses, execution failures and material misstatements."  Several hours after the firm's announcement, former Louisiana Attorney General Charles Foti announced that his law firm would begin an investigation into whether WWE had violated state or federal securities law. Following Lemelson's May 16, 2014 call for changes at WWE, the company announced that it was cutting its staff by seven percent and its stock price appreciated from its May 16, 2014 closing price of $11.27 to $16.40 on February 13, 2015. On March 30, 2015, USA Today reported that Lemelson, in February 2015, had sold his stake in WWE at $16.50.

On April 22, 2014, Lemelson's announcement that his firm was building a stake in the stock of semiconductor and LED equipment maker Kulicke & Soffa Industries and urging the company to authorize a share repurchase plan sent shares of the stock soaring ten percent. Following the call, USA Today reported: Four months later, on August 27, 2014, Kulicke & Soffa heeded Lemelson's share repurchase recommendation, announcing that its Board of Directors had authorized a share purchase of up to $100 million.

On June 16, 2014, Lemelson released a 25-page research report on Ligand Pharmaceuticals, a publicly traded pharmaceutical company. The report concluded that severe competitive threats to Ligand’s key royalty programs, going concern risks and other challenges were so significant that the stock had no intrinsic value.  Over the ensuing six trading days, the stock dropped 16 percent on Lemelson’s criticisms. Three weeks later, on July 3, 2014, Lemelson announced that he had further increased his short position in Ligand and released an appended 12-page research report questioning the commercial viability of Ligand's products and reaffirming his position that downside risk for Ligand "at 100%." On August 7, 2014, the financial media outlet Benzinga reported, "Shares have sold off more than 25 percent since Lemelson Capital published its bearish thesis on the stock in mid-June."  On November 18, 2014, Yahoo Finance reported that Lemelson had covered his short position at an approximately 40 percent return.

On October 20, 2014, the financial media outlet Seeking Alpha reported that Lemelson Capital had taken a two percent stake in Geospace Technologies Corporation, a NASDAQ-traded company that develops products for seismic data acquisition in the oil and gas industry, sending the company's stock up 4.2 percent, citing Lemelson's earlier involvement in Kulicke & Soffa Industries' share repurchase program.

Lemelson marked The Amvona Fund's second anniversary in September 2014, with the firm reporting overall gross and net gains since its September 2012 launch of 257 percent and 160 percent, respectively.

On September 25, 2015, the financial media outlet Benzinga reported that Lemelson was short Skechers, an NYSE-traded footwear company, at an average (adjusted for a 3:1 stock split) cost of $132," calling it "radically overpriced." Lemelson said that he would continue to short the stock, which he said was vulnerable to a "precipitous fall." Twenty seven days later, on October 22, 2015, shares of the company plunged more than 30 percent in one day following disappointing earnings.

Religious leadership and philanthropy

Lemelson was ordained as a Greek Orthodox Deacon on July 23, 2011 and, the following day, as a priest by Metropolitan Elpidophoros the Abbot of the Theological School at Halki. He was granted the ecclesiastical name Emmanuel and assigned to the Albanian Orthodox Diocese of America, a jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate in the United States. In June 2013, he was assigned to the Holy Metropolis of Switzerland, a jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate.

In December 2012, with the blessing of Bartholomew I of Constantinople, Lemelson founded The Lantern Foundation, a non-profit foundation focused on supporting religious, charitable and educational causes with a special focus on those associated with the Ecumenical Patriarchate. Since its inception, he has served as president of the foundation.  Lemelson’s theological work has centered on canonical issues in apostolic mission and ethics in relationship to commerce, finance and social justice.

In November 2014, Lemelson was named a member of the Orthodox Church's delegation for a two day meeting between Ecumenical Patriarchate Bartholomew I and Pope Francis in Constantinople.  He advocates closer relations between the Orthodox and Catholic Churches and for a resolution of the differences that first arose between the two churches in the East-West Schism.

On November 26, 2014, he told The Washington Post that "Christians are facing unprecedented persecution in our modern era."

On September 30, 2015, Lemelson joined U.S. presidential candidate Donald Trump at a New Hampshire campaign rally for Trump at which Trump asked for and received Lemelson's blessing. Lemelson, who also offered the invocation, spoke at the rally, condemning the abortion practices of Planned Parenthood.

In an October 26, 2015 Wall Street Journal documentary about Lemelson, he advocated a philosophy of investment based on Christian ethics, saying: "If we take scripture as a guide, particularly Matthew 25:14-30, we hear the parable of the talents, and in that parable it’s very clear The Lord blesses exceedingly those who take the talents they're given and multiply them, and for those who would not, even what they have will be taken away, so I think it comes down to our view of how we see capital, how we see our talents, if we see them as something that is our own, the result of our own distinct sacrifices and work, we’ll have a very different approach to how we handle it then if we see it as something that we’ve been entrusted with, that we’re meant to be stewards over. God gives us talents so we can use them, and the purpose of those talents is to glorify The Lord.”

Commentary and activism

In 2010, Lemelson began to write and publish extensively on investment-related topics, including security analysis, Christian investment philosophy and ethics. Lemelson was a national critic of what he considered fraudulent practices in the securitization of mortgage-backed securities and a proponent of long-term investments in U.S. value stocks. His writings on mortgage-backed securities were cited widely in relation to the landmark cases U.S. Bank National Association v. Antonio Ibanez and Francis J. Bevilacqua v. Pablo Rodriguez, in which the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court held that financial institutions that did not hold both mortgages and the notes had no legal standing to pursue foreclosure proceedings against residents of these properties.

His writings and commentary have advocated long-term holdings in U.S. equities and have been critical of the securitization of residential mortgages, which some economists now argue was a significant contributing factor to the 2007-09 U.S. housing correction and the ensuing U.S. recession.  His writing on these issues has been cited by Anonymous, Occupy Wall Street, the Massachusetts Registry of Deeds and by attorneys and litigants involved in mortgage securitization litigation.

In August 2014, the financial media outlet Hedge Fund Alert reported that Lemelson reached agreement with U.S. Bank after challenging the right of the bank's securitization trust to collect the principal and interest on a mortgage he took out in 2006. As part of the settlement, Lemelson was awarded relief of $1.2 million in principal, interest and fees.

Lemelson's investment activism and commentary have influenced the stock prices of several equities, including Geospace Technologies, Kulicke & Soffa Industries, Ligand Pharmaceuticals, World Wrestling Entertainment and others.

Lemelson has appeared frequently as a guest on the "Pre-Market Prep" radio show of Benzinga and on CBS News, Fox Newsand Fox Business Network.

In a November 5, 2015 interview with Fox Business Network, Lemelson criticized the Federal Reserve for keeping interest rates artificially low, saying: "We’ve been in uncommon monetary policy for about ten years. This has led to tremendous income inequality in the world. The top 85 people in the world control the same wealth as the bottom 50 percent; that’s 3.5 billion people. When you have interest rates that are that low, and cheap money, you’re going to inflate asset prices, and that’s the conduit of wealth for the rich. But for the rest of the world, one in nine people don’t have enough to eat, and one in seven live off about a $1.25 per day, so a large part of that income is going to basic necessities like food. As leaders in the world economically in the U.S., we have to be very cognizant of the impact of low interest rates and quantitative easing."

Personal life

Lemelson is married to Theodora Anjeza Lemelson with whom he has four children. He resides in both Massachusetts and Lugano, Switzerland and speaks three languages (English, German and Greek).


