
#Article: Farah Khan
#Type: regular article

Farah Khan  (born 9 January 1965) is an Indian film director, film producer, actress and choreographer. She is best known for her choreographic work in numerous Bollywood films. She has choreographed dance routines for more than a hundred songs in over 80 Hindi films. She has since become a film director as well. In addition, she has worked on international projects such as Marigold: An Adventure in India, Monsoon Wedding and the Chinese film Perhaps Love.

Personal life

Farah Khan was born on 9 January 1965. Her mother Menaka is the sister of screenwriter Honey Irani and former child actor Daisy Irani.Farha's brother Sajid Khan is a comedian, actor and film director. When their parents' marriage broke up, Farah and Sajid were shuttled between different homes. Film personalities Farhan Akhtar and Zoya Akhtar are Farah's cousins.

Farah Khan married Shirish Kunder, the editor of her film Main Hoon Na, on 9 December 2004. They have since worked together on each other's films, such as Jaan-E-Mann, Om Shanti Om, and Tees Maar Khan. Khan gave birth to triplets in 2008; one son and two daughters.

Career

Farah Khan was studying sociology in St. Xavier's College, Mumbai when Michael Jackson's "Thriller" was telecast. She was so inspired, that although she hadn’t danced before that, it soon became her vocation. She learned to dance basically on her own, and set up a dance group.When the choreographer Saroj Khan walked out of the film Jo Jeeta Wohi Sikandar, Khan took over. This was followed by many more songs. She met actor Shahrukh Khan on the set of Kabhi Haan Kabhi Naa and the two have since become good friends and started working together.

Farah Khan's work in Monsoon Wedding, Bombay Dreams and Vanity Fair was nominated for a 2004 Tony Award as Best Choreographer, along with collaborator Anthony van Laast, for Bombay Dreams. She has won the Filmfare Best Choreography Award five times. Khan then went on to direct her first film Main Hoon Na Starring Shah Rukh Khan which was produced by Red Chillies Entertainment. Khan became the second female director to be nominated for Filmfare Best Director Award. As a director, her second movie Om Shanti Om Starring Shah Rukh Khan and debutant Deepika Padukone became the highest grossing Hindi film of all time at its time of release. Tees Maar Khan was her next directorial release. In 2012 she made her film acting debut in a leading role in Shirin Farhad Ki Toh Nikal Padi, directed by Bela Bhansali Sehgal.

Khan initially announced her plans to direct Happy New Year in 2005, multiple delays and cast changes occurred over a number of years. The project has again been reported as being in the works as of 2012.

Farah Khan trained Colombian pop star Shakira for a Bollywood version of her song Hips Don't Lie for the MTV Video Music Awards on 31 August 2006.  Khan has also choreographed Kylie Minogue for the song "Chiggy Wiggy" in the 2009 movie Blue.

She hosted the celebrity chat show Tere Mere Beach Mein and was a judge on the reality television series Indian Idol - first and second season, Jo Jeeta Wohi Super Star, Entertainment Ke Liye Kuch Bhi Karega and Dance India Dance Li'l Masters. She also judged dance reality show Just Dance alongside Hrithik Roshan and Vaibhavi Merchant on Star Plus.

Khan and her husband have started a production company called "Three's Company" named in honor of their triplets. In 2012, she choreographed "Ishq Wala Love" and "Radh"a for Student Of The Year. In 2013, she choreographed "Jumping Jhapak".And was seen as the host of special series "

Filmography

See also

	Indian Women in Dance


