
#Article: Anne Waiguru
#Type: regular article

Anne Waiguru is a Kenyan who was nominated by President Uhuru Kenyatta as the first Cabinet Secretary for Devolution and Planning on 25 April 2013. She holds a master's degree in Economic Policy from the University of Nairobi, and, has specialized experience in finance, financial management systems, public service reform and capacity corruption building, and, governance. She is behind establishment of huduma centres and the 30% procurement rule. Huduma centres  are stations where citizens seeking services from government ranging from paying for taxes, renewing driving licences, registering births, replacing identity cards etc. The 30% procurement rule gives marginalized groups (the youth, women and people living with disabilities) an opportunity to supply the Kenyan government with goods and services. Anne Waiguru has resigned from devolution ministry over corruption allegations under her watch.

Education

Waiguru attended Precious Blood Riruta High school then later sat her A-level exams in 1989 at the Moi Forces Academy in Nairobi after studying Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry. Upon graduating from the University of Nairobi, she worked for Transparency International as an intern and research assistant, and then joined the Kenya Leadership Institute. Waiguru holds a master's degree in Economic Policy from the University of Nairobi, and has specialized experience in public finance, financial management systems, public service reform, capacity building and governance.

Career

Waiguru began her career in the public service by providing Technical Assistance to the Public Service Reform Secretariat in what was then the Cabinet Office. She then served as the Head of Governance and the Economic Stimulus Programme at the National Treasury, Alternate to the Permanent Secretary/National Treasury in the Public Procurement Oversight Authority and Advisory Board and the Women Enterprise Fund Board. She was successfully nominated in 2011 as one of the Top 40 under 40 women in the country, the only nominee at the time from the Public Service.

Waiguru was the Director, Integrated Financial Management and Information System (IFMIS), and, Head of Governance at the National Treasury. She served briefly as a Senior Public Sector Manager/Assistant Vice President, at Citi-group. Previously, sheserved as a Technical Advisor in the Cabinet Office, Ofﬁce of the President on secondment from the World Bank.

Waiguru has served as the Alternate to the Permanent Secretary National Treasury in the Public Procurement Oversight Authority Advisory Board, and, the Women Enterprise Fund Board.

Corruption allegations

In September 2015, Waiguru was asked by the director of public prosecutions in Kenya to record statements about disappearance of Kshs 791M (which was approx USD 7.9M) from the coffers of the national youth service which is a department in the ministry she heads.

The Kenyan Parliamentary Accounts Committee found that the Devolution ministry, where she served as a Cabinet Secretary, spent KSh450,000 ($4500) for 18 custom-made condom dispensers. The ministry's asset register also revealed Sh1.7 million ($17000) was spent for an HD television set in Anne Waiguru's office and Sh12 million ($120000) for an office partition, in the 2013/2014 financial year.

The register, presented by the ministry's Principal Secretary Peter Mangiti, listed purchase of a copier at Sh1.5 million ($15000), while Sh1.9million ($19000) was spent for free downloadable Adobe software and Sh250,000 ($2500) for ten flashdisks/memory sticks.

In a rejoinder to the allegations, Waiguru claimed that the allegations made against her were personal attacks and pointed out that corruption is endemic in other ministries in the Kenyan government but the media was not pointing it out. She said in a post posted on her Facebook page: "It's amazing that whereas there are similar and more serious allegations of misuse of funds in many government departments there is never the personalized level of attack on CSs that has been directed at me. Surely this is no longer about the fight against corruption".


