
#Article: B. V. R. Mohan Reddy
#Type: regular article

BVR Mohan Reddy (born 1950) is an Indian business executive and engineering manager who is the founder and managing director of Cyient, (formerly Infotech Enterprises).  He joined DCM Group in 1974, and has worked subsequently with MICO Bosch, HCL, and OMC Computers Limited. He is the Chairman of NASSCOM for 2014-2015.

Early life and education

BVR Mohan Reddy was born on 12 October 1950. After completing his school education, he graduated in Mechanical Engineering in 1971 from the College of Engineering, Kakinada, Andhra University. He attained his Masters’ degrees in Management Engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA and in Industrial Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur

Career

Mohan started his career with the DCM group (Shiram Refrigeration), where he contributed to the assembly line operations in Diesel Engine production. After leaving the DCM group, he worked with MICO Bosch and then HCL, before joining OMC computers as Managing Director.

Mohan founded Cyient as Infotech Enterprises in 1991, and he currently serves as the Executive Chairman of the company.

He has also been a member of the NASSCOM Executive Council since 2003 and served as the Chairman of the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), southern region (2008-2009). He is associated with councils of various academic and industry forums and has led several initiatives to help industrial companies evolve and grow. Reddy also serves as Chairman, Board of Governors of IIT, Hyderabad; member on the Board of NIIT University, Neemrana; and member of Centre for Innovation and Entrepreneurship at IIIT Hyderabad.

Awards

	Hyderabad Management Association awarded him the "Entrepreneur of the year" for 1992

	HYSEA Outstanding Contribution Award in 1997

	Ernst &Young presented him the " Outstanding Entrepreneur Award" in 1999

	ASME Leadership Award 

	Honorary Doctorate - JNTU, Hyderabad

	Distinguished Alumni Award - IIT, Kanpur

Honours

	Present Chairman NASSCOM

	Vice Chairman NASSCOM

	 Chairman, Board of Governors, IIT Hyderabad

	President of Electronics Industries Association of Andhra Pradesh (ELIAP)

	President of Hyderabad Software Exporters Association (HYSEA)

	Vice Chairman of the CII-AP Chapter.

	Chairman of CII (AP State Council)


