
#Article: Jean Hudson Boyd
#Type: regular article

Jean Hudson Boyd is a retired judge in the United States of America who served as the Presiding Judge of Texas' 323rd District Court. The 323rd District Court serves Tarrant County, Texas as its juvenile court. Boyd, a Republican, assumed office in 1995, but is known for her controversial 2013 sentencing of Ethan Couch, a sixteen-year-old who killed four people and injured nine while driving drunk.

Biography

Education and Career

Boyd earned a Bachelor's degree from Texas Technological University and a law degree from South Texas College of Law. She practiced law as a juvenile attorney before becoming an Associate Judge of the 323rd District Court in 1987, and the Presiding Judge of the 323rd District Court in 1995. Boyd chairs the Juvenile Justice Committee of the Judicial Section of the State Bar of Texas, and was a member of the Board of the Texas Juvenile Probation Commission. She chaired the Juvenile Law Section of the State Bar of Texas from 1993 to 1994. Boyd served as President of the Fort Worth-Tarrant Count Young Lawyers Association in 1985, and as President of the Tarrant County Women Lawyer's Association from 1982-1983.

Couch Case

Boyd heard the case of Ethan Couch, a wealthy sixteen-year-old white male that killed four people and injured nine people while driving drunk, in 2013. Boyd sentenced Couch to ten years probation for his crimes, and also ordered him confined to a rehabilitation facility for treatment. Boyd's ruling outraged the families of the victims, and provoked national criticism, especially after news sources revealed that Couch's defense team argued that he was not culpable because he could not understand the consequences of his decisions because of his financial privilege, a condition an expert witness termed "affluenza." Boyd herself specifically stated that the affluenza argument did not influence her judgement, but rather, that she merely felt Couch needed treatment, and that given his parents' financial position, Couch could get better treatment in a rehabilitation center than in a youth detention center. 

Critics charged that Boyd had essentially given a free pass to Couch because he was white and wealthy, noting that in 2004, Boyd sentenced Eric Miller a sixteen-year-old black male from a poor family to twenty years imprisonment for killing one person while driving drunk. The 2004 case did differ to some extent from Couch case, though, in that the defendant in the 2004 case committed a separate felony on the night in question, stealing a truck. However, in Couch's case, he had stolen a truck from his father, which was viewed as a lesser offense. Boyd had intended to pass a similar mandatory rehabilitation sentence in a 2012 case involving a death stemming from a fight, but no rehabilitation program was willing to accept the suspect, who was then subsequently sentenced to ten years in jail. Boyd has a history of long probationary sentences for juveniles and keeping juveniles in the juvenile court system, although at least one juvenile, convicted of murder, was sentenced to forty years imprisonment following his conviction.

Over thirty thousand persons signed an online petition to remove Boyd from the bench after the Boyd's ruling in the Couch case.  Governor Rick Perry did not take any action based off the petition.

Marriage and children

Boyd married John G. Boyd, D.D.S., in 1977 and the two have one grown child, Scott Boyd.

Awards

	 Judge of the Year (1999), selected by the Texas Court Appointed Special Advocates

	 Judge Scott Moore Award (2002), selected by the Child Advocates of Tarrant County

	 Angel in Adoption Award (2003), selected by the Congressional Coalition on Adoption Institution

	 Silver Gavel Award (2011), selected by the Texas Center for the Judiciary, recognizing her as a judge that exemplified ability, integrity, and courage during at least ten years on the bench. 

See also

	 Affluenza

	 Ethan Couch


