
#Article: Dietrich Juengling
#Type: regular article

Dietrich Juengling is a special effects artist known for his Emmy Award-nominated work on large lighting productions.

Juengling has worked on a number of large productions as a lighting and media programmer, 3-D effects artist, and visual effects artist with an emphasis in lighting. These have included lighting for large buildings, music performances, movies, and Broadway shows.

Projects

One of Juengling's earlier projects included the 1997 Batman & Robin film, where he worked as an assistant lighting director.

Following Batman & Robin, in 1998 Juengling was nominated along with Lee Rose for an Emmy for Outstanding Lighting Direction (Electronic) For A Drama Series, Variety Series, Miniseries or Movie for his work on Yanni's production of Yanni: Tribute.  The tribute included scenes from the Taj Mahal and the Forbidden City, which gave Juengling the opportunity to display his work in other countries.

Another high profile project for a large-scale building Juengling was involved in was being on the design team for the release of the Empire State Building's new lighting as of 2012. The lighting is 50% more efficient than before, can be started at the stroke of a button and contains over 16 million colors.  The ESB partnered with the Macy's Fireworks Spectacular for their 37th Fourth of July fireworks show, unveiling the ESB lighting project for the first time.

Juengling partnered with Marc Brickman to create a 3D projection landscape from the provided artwork for a Cat Stevens comeback performance. Juengling stated: “We started with Dogan’s illustrations, made digital files of them and broke each one up into three separate layers, at all times thinking of what would look best either upstage or downstage. We then had to paint in the missing areas of the imagery because the original artwork was more square in shape than the 2:1 ratio projection surface. The individual layers are then re-blended by Oz to form a single image with a 3D effect. In some songs we add an extra layer of animation with leaves, rain or snow falling to create even more of a magical feel. All of this imagery is loaded on to three PRG Mbox EXtreme media servers with each of them able to produce two outputs that feed six Barco 20kW projectors positioned at a very steep angle.”

In addition to Yanni and Cat Stevens, Juengling has worked with musical group The Rascals as well.

Personal life

Juengling lives in an affluent neighborhood of San Bernardino, California with his wife and their children.

He is the son of German immigrant Paul Franz Jüngling (anglicized as Juengling upon arrival to the States).

Other

Juengling works as head lighting designer for Universal Studios Japan in Osaka.

In literature, Juengling's work has been referenced in Entertainment Design and Theatre Profiles by the Theatre Communications Group.


