
#Article: Collette Sunderman
#Type: regular article

Collette Sunderman (born October 25, 1959) is an American director principally involved with voice direction for animated television, film productions and video games. 

Her credits include The Powerpuff Girls, Samurai Jack, What's New, Scooby-Doo, Duck Dodgers, Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends, Chowder, and Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated.

Early life

Collette Marie Bennett was born in Sun Valley, Los Angeles, California.

Career

She began her career in animation in the early 1990s for Hanna-Barbera, where Sunderman worked as a talent coordinator. 

Several years later, she did the casting and, on some occasion, co-directed with Kris Zimmerman on Dexter's Laboratory, The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest and Johnny Bravo. However, the first show she directed was the short film Kenny and the Chimp in 1998, four years later turned into Codename: Kids Next Door for which she was called upon to voice direct.

Sunderman regularly works for Warner Bros. Animation/Hanna Barbera and Cartoon Network Studios. She is also actively involved in the Scooby Doo projects, having worked on both animated series and direct-to-video films featuring the most notable canine. 

She is currently directing Avengers Assemble, Ultimate Spider-Man, Be Cool, Scooby-Doo! and All Hail King Julien, which she is co-directing alongside Lisa Schaffer.

Production filmography

	 Adventure Time - Voice Director

	 All Hail King Julien - Voice Director

	 The Amazing Screw-On Head - Voice Director

	 Avengers Assemble - Voice Director

	 Batman: Arkham Asylum - Voice Director

	 Batman: Arkham City - Voice Director

	 Be Cool, Scooby-Doo! - Casting & Voice Director

	 Camp Lazlo - Casting, Recording Director

	 Cartoon Network Racing - Voice Director

	 Cave Kids - Talent Coordinator

	 Charlie and The Chocolate Factory: The Video Game - Voice Director

	 Chowder - Casting & Voice Director

	 Clash of the Titans: The Video Game - Casting & Voice Director

	 Class of 3000 - Casting & Voice Director

	 Codename: Kids Next Door - Casting & Voice Director

	 Constantine: The Video Game - Voice Director

	 Cow & Chicken - Casting Manager

	 DC Nation Shorts - Casting Director

	 Dear Dracula - Casting & Voice Director

	 Dexter's Laboratory - Talent Coordinator, Casting Manager

	 Duck Dodgers - Casting & Voice Director

	 Dumb and Dumber - Talent Coordinator

	 Elf: Buddy's Musical Christmas - Voice Direction

	 The Flintstones: On the Rocks - Casting Director

	 The Flintstones & WWE: Stone Age SmackDown! - Casting & Voice Director

	 Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends - Recording Director

	 Generator Rex - Casting & Voice Director

	 Hi Hi Puffy AmiYumi - Casting Director

	 I am Weasel - Casting Manager

	 Jetsons: The Movie - Casting Director

	 Johnny Bravo - Casting Manager, Recording Director

	 Kenny and the Chimp - Recording Director

	 Lego Batman: The Video Game - Voice Director

	 The Looney Tunes Show - Casting & Voice Director

	 Megas XLR - Casting Director

	 Mucha Lucha! - Casting Director

	 The Powerpuff Girls - Casting, Recording Director

	 The Powerpuff Girls Movie - Voice Director

	 The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest - Casting Manager, Talent Coordinator

	 Samurai Jack - Casting Director

	 Samurai Jack: The Shadow of Aku - Voice Director

	 Scooby-Doo and the Alien Invaders - Casting Director

	 Scooby-Doo! and the Legend of the Vampire - Casting Director

	 Scooby-Doo! and the Spooky Swamp - Voice Director

	 Scooby-Doo! and the Witch's Ghost - Casting Director

	 Scooby-Doo! in Where's My Mummy? - Casting & Voice Director

	 Scooby-Doo on Zombie Island - Casting Director

	 Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated - Casting & Voice Director

	 Scooby-Doo! Unmasked - Voice Director

	 Star Wars: Clone Wars - Casting Director

	 Steel Battalion - Voice Director

	 Tom and Jerry: The Magic Ring - Voice Director

	 Tom and Jerry Meet Sherlock Holmes - Casting Director

	 Ultimate Spider-Man - Casting & Voice Director

	 What a Cartoon! - Talent Coordinator

	 What's New, Scooby-Doo? - Casting & Voice Director

	 Whatever Happened to Robot Jones? - Casting Director, Recording Director

	 Viewtiful Joe - Voice Director

	 Viewtiful Joe 2 - Voice Director

	 Xiaolin Chronicles - Casting & Voice Director

Personal life

Sunderman is married and has one son and one daughter.


