
#Article: Tiffany Coyne
#Type: regular article

Tiffany Adams Coyne (born May 6, 1982) is an American model and dancer. She is the model on Let's Make a Deal, having replaced Alison Fiori in 2009.

Early life and career

Tiffany Lynn Adams was born in Layton, Utah on May 6, 1982.  She has two sisters, five step-sisters and two step-brothers. When she was three years old she started dancing, focusing on jazz, hip hop, and ballet dancing. As a youth, her family moved a lot because her mother "liked to build houses." The family lived near Hill Air Force Base for a while. She went to middle school and one year of high school in West Haven, Utah. She completed her high school education at Northridge High School in Layton after the family moved back to the town. She was on the dance squad at nearby Fremont High School. After graduating from high school in 2000 she was a performer for two seasons with the America First Jazz Dancers for the Utah Jazz. During that time, she also taught dance classes locally.

After working for the Jazz, she performed internationally on a cruise ship, including in Denmark, Sweden, Russia, and Norway. She relocated to Las Vegas, Nevada and performed in Jubilee!, Fashionistas, and Sirens of TI. She also appeared in informercials. Let's Make a Deal relaunched in 2009 in Las Vegas. Coyne auditioned multiple times and was hired. She kept working at in the Sirens of TI as a back up plan in case Let's Make a Deal ended. She taped two episodes a day of Let's Make a Deal and then worked at Sirens of TI at night. Deal moved to Los Angeles and Coyne would drive back and forth five days a week to work on both shows. She relocated to Los Angeles to start season two of Deal. Her role as a model at Deal has been described as "to make prizes look better by her mere presence." To improve her improv skills while working with Wayne Brady and Jonathan Mangum, she took improv classes.

She was on maternity leave for much of the first half of the 2013-14 season, and returned to taping September 2013.

Upon relocating to Los Angeles, Coyne played herself in The Bold and the Beautiful, was a stand in model for The Price Is Right, and modeled for United Airlines and Chase Bank.

Personal life

She is married to Chris Coyne, whom she met while working on a cruise ship. They live in Los Angeles, California. Their first child, Scarlett Rose, was born in August, 2013.


