
#Article: Pankaja Munde
#Type: regular article

Pankaja Munde-Palwe is an Indian politician belonging to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

Early life

Pankaja was born on 26 July 1979 to Central Cabinet Minister Late Gopinath Munde and Pradnya Munde. She has two younger siblings, Pritam Munde and Yashashari. She completed her graduation and also holds an MBA. She is a niece of late Pramod Mahajan, and a cousin to Rahul Mahajan and Poonam Mahajan. NCP leader Dhananjay Munde leader is also her cousin.

Her father, Gopinath Munde, died of road accident at New Delhi in 3rd June 2014.

Political career

Pankaja Munde served as the State President of BJP's youth wing, the Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha (BJYM), in 2012. She was elected to the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra from Parli constituency in 2009. She took oath as Maharashtra Cabinet Minister on 31 October 2014. She was allotted Ministry of Rural Development, Women & Child welfare and Water Conservation.

Pankaja Munde and her panel won sugar mill election to Vaidyanath sugar factory in Beed district. The panel led by Pankaja won 18 out of 20 seats whereas the panel led by her cousin and Leader of Opposition in Maharashtra Council Dhananjay Munde failed to win any seat.

On 13 February 2015, Pankaja Munde cleared the awards of 24 government contracts to various vendors, as the Minister for Women and Child Welfare Development. One of the contracts involved purchase of chikki, mats and books for  206 crore. In June 2015, the opposition party Indian National Congress accused her of being involved in a scam, alleging that she had flouted norms by clearing the purchase without floating tenders. Congress also alleged that some of the vendors had close links to her family. Munde rejected the accusations of corruption, arguing that a policy for an online tendering system was not in place when she commissioned the purchase. Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis also defended her, stating that the norm of inviting e-tenders was introduced by his government in April, two months after Munde cleared the contracts. An investigation by The Indian Express revealed that a non-profit headed by a Congress leader Pradnya Parab received the bulk ( 114 crore) of contracts cleared by Pankaja Munde.

Personal life

Pankaja married to Amit Palwe. The couple has one son name as Aryman.

She has authored a photobiography of her father, titled Lokneta Gopinath Munde.


