
#Article: Sandra Maas
#Type: regular article

Sandra Maas is an American journalist and newscaster. She has worked in the San Diego, California area since 1990 and has been nominated for 13 Emmy awards. She is currently the weekday co-anchor of the KUSI news at6 and 10 pm and host of the weekly public affairs program San Diego People

Early life and education

Maas was raised in Mission Viejo, California. Her father owned a window tinting business and her mother was an elementary school principal. She graduated summa cum laude from California State University, Chico, with a Bachelor of Arts degree in Communications in 1985. During college, Maas worked as a news anchor for KCHO Chico and KPAY radio, Redding. She made the transition to television during her senior year in college, serving as weeknight co-anchor at ABC affiliate, KRCR-TV.

Career

In 1986, Maas moved to NBC affiliate KSBY-TV in San Luis Obispo, California, where she co-anchored the 6 and 11 p.m. newscasts. Maas also served as the station's medical reporter at the start of the AIDS crisis, earning a Golden Mike Award for her on air work.In 1990, Maas relocated to San Diego and CBS Affiliate KFMB-TV, where she co-anchored News 8 at 4pm with Mitch Duncan.  In addition, she served as the station's medical reporter and worked for CBS Newspath as a national medical correspondent.During this time, Maas was also a regular fill-in on the Jeff and Jer Morning Show on Star 94.1.In 1993, she had a bit part in the CBS soap opera, The Young and the Restless, playing the role of nurse Sally Winslow.In 2001, Maas was part of a mass exodus that left KFMB-TV when it severed ties with the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists.  She resigned after an unsuccessful contract renegotiation.In 2002, Maas was a freelance journalist for Fox affiliate XETV in San Diego.In 2004, Maas moved to KUSI-TV, serving first as a co-anchor on Good Morning San Diego and in 2006 adding host duties for the lifestyle show Inside San Diego with Andrea Naversen.In 2009, she became weeknight co-anchor of The KUSI News at 6 and 10pm with Allen Denton.

Maas has been Mistress of Ceremonies of the Ernst & Young Entrepreneur of the Year Awards since 1993. She also volunteers as Mistress of Ceremonies or moderator for several non-profit organization events.

Awards

Maas has been nominated for 13 Emmy awards.  In 2011, she received an Associated Press Mark Twain Award for her contribution to “Oxy: What Your Kids Aren’t Telling You,” and a San Diego Press Club Award for investigative reporting.  She has also received a Golden Mike and has been inducted into The Silver Circle of The National Academy of Television Arts & Sciences.

Community Contributions

Maas served as moderator for the The Greater San Diego Regional Chamber of Commerce Congressional Delegation debate.  She has also hosted The San Diego County District Attorney's "The National Crime Vigil."  

She has hosted or acted as Mistress of Ceremonies for fundraisers for the Salvation Army, the Make-A-Wish Foundation, The ARC-San Diego, and Rady Children’s Hospital (where she serves on the auxiliary board).


