
#Article: Norlin Zainal Abidin
#Type: regular article

Norlin Dato' Zainal Abidin (born 20 May 1974) is a property developer and entrepreneur. She sits on the board of directors of SCRL Properties Sdn Bhd, a property development, management and investments company based in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. She is also the CEO of Seri Chenang Resort & Spa Langkawi.

Career

Norlin started her career in real estate at a very young age as a site office assistant during the construction of the first Carrefour Hypermarket in Malaysia located in SS15 Subang Jaya. In 1996, she joined IGB Corporation Berhad's subsidiary Mid Valley City Sdn Bhd, the development company for Mid Valley Megamall, one of the largest malls in Southeast Asia and the world at the time and later joined the leasing team.

In 2000, she left the company after project completion to join City Square Properties Sdn Bhd as a Marketing & Leasing Executive.

In 2005, Norlin joined YTL Land Sdn Bhd, a subsidiary of YTL Corporation, as Senior Marketing & Leasing Executive, in a team responsible for the re-launch of the new Starhill Gallery in July 2005, as well as the revamp of Lot 10.

In 2009, she joined CCN Consulting Sdn Bhd, as Assistant Marketing Manager, to market and promote shopping centres under the company's portfolio.

In 2011, Norlin and two other partners, incorporated SCRL Properties Sdn Bhd, a property development, management and investments company. As Director of Sales & Marketing, she oversees the management of various development projects under the company's portfolio.

Norlin was appointed chief executive officer of Seri Chenang Resort & Spa Langkawi in January 2012. With her vast experience and knowledge in the industry, she was tasked to liaise with the project team, set up a pre-opening team, and eventually run the resort. The media launch was held on 21 June 2012 in Kuala Lumpur and the official opening was held at the resort in Langkawi on 30 June 2012, officiated by former Prime Minister of Malaysia Tun Dr. Mahathir Mohamad.

Education

Norlin is an Assunta Alumni, having attended both Assunta Primary School and Assunta Secondary School in Petaling Jaya. She graduated high school in 1991. She then studied Graphics Design at Limkokwing Institute of Technology, now known as Limkokwing University of Creative Technology. She graduated from Limkokwing in 1994.

Personal life

Norlin is the fourth of five siblings. She got married in December 2005 and has a daughter.

Features

Norlin graced the covers of Malaysia Tatler - July 2012 issue and has been featured in various magazines published in Malaysia.


