
#Article: Gaston Browne
#Type: regular article

Gaston Browne (born 9 February 1967) is the 4th and current Prime Minister of Antigua and Barbuda, in office since 2014. He led the Antigua Labour Party to victory in the June 2014 general election.

Early life and career

Browne was born on 9 February 1967, in Potters Village on the island of Antigua. His life as a teenager was extremely tough. As a child, he lived in Grays Farm - commonly referred to as the ghetto on the island - with his paternal great-grandmother, who was in her eighties, at the time, partially blind, poor and aging. After her passing, he later grew up in Point, another poor area on island.

Browne was appointed to the position of Commercial Banking Manager in the Swiss American Banking Group, having served for many years in the Group, which was a major banking consortium in Antigua and Barbuda, comprising offshore and onshore banks and a trust company. In 1999, Browne answered an obvious call to promote the welfare of his fellow citizens by entering the political arena. He was duly appointed as the Parliamentary Representative for the Constituency of St. John's City West. His outstanding dedication and commitment to service and distinguished credentials in the field of finance propelled him to the portfolio of Minister of Planning, Trade, Industry, Commerce and Public Service Affairs in his very first term as an MP.

Education

As a child, he attended the Villa Primary School and later the Princess Margaret School after successfully passing the nation's common entrance examination. After completing his secondary education, Gaston attended the City Banking College in the United Kingdom, where he gained a first degree in banking and later pursued studies at the University of Manchester, he earning an MBA in Finance.

Prime Minister

Gaston Browne led the Antigua Labour Party to victory in the 12 June 2014 general election, after 10 years in opposition, winning 14 out of 17 seats. Browne was sworn in as Prime Minister on 13 June 2014. He defeated Baldwin Spencer's UPP, which had ruled for 10 years.

Family and personal life

Browne is married to Maria Bird, niece of the second Prime Minister Lester Bird. The couple have a son, Prince Gaston Browne, who is Browne's third son, as he had three children prior to marriage.


