
#Article: Angus MacLane
#Type: regular article

Angus MacLane is an American film director, animator, screenwriter, and voice actor currently working at Pixar Animation Studios.  His most notable works with the company are BURN-E, Small Fry, Toy Story of Terror!.  He also created Cubedudes for the Lego Company.

Currently, he is co-directing Finding Dory with Pixar veteran Andrew Stanton.

Early life and Career

Angus MacLane grew up in Portland, Oregon. He originally wanted to be a comic book artist but half way through school switched to animation. and hoped one day he could work at the Will Vinton Studios (now Laika) and would eventually go on to help work for the studio before working for Pixar. In 1997, He received a bachelor of fine arts from Rhode Island School of Design.

Angus joined Pixar in 1997, starting as an animator on Geri's Game. He has now worked on every Pixar feature film with the exception of Toy Story and has also worked in the character development of Monsters, Inc. and The Incredibles. His work on The Incredibles gained him an Annie for Outstanding Achievement in Character Animation.  After serving as Supervising Animator on One Man Band Angus started working on the story team for Andrew Stanton’s WALL-E and later moved up to Directing Animator. After animating a small scene for a side character named BURN-E, Angus wanted to know what might happen to the character. He originally wanted BURN-E’s story arc part of the actual film, but Stanton ended up wanting him to develop it into a short which eventually became BURN-E, which can now be viewed on the DVD and Blu-ray releases of WALL-E. For a short amount of time, he worked on the animation for Up, and the animation on Toy Story 3.

After BURN-E, Angus started to move further to directing and writing works in the studio with the Toy Story Toon: Small Fry and Pixar's first TV special Toy Story of Terror!, in which he won an Annie for Outstanding Achievement in Directing in an Animated TV/Broadcast Production.  According to Andrew Stanton's Twitter page, Angus is working as co-director on Pixar's upcoming film Finding Dory.

Filmography

	 Geri's Game (1997) - Animator

	 A Bug's Life (1998) - Additional Animator

	 Toy Story 2 (1999) - Animator, Additional Storyboard Artist

	 For the Birds (2000) - Animator

	 Monsters, Inc. (2001) - Animator, Character Developer, Additional Storyboarding

	 Finding Nemo (2003) - Animator

	 The Incredibles (2004) - Animator, Character Developer

	 One Man Band (2005) - Supervising Animator

	 Cars (2006) - Additional Animator

	 Ratatouille (2007) - Additional Animator

	 WALL-E (2008) - Directing Animator, Storyboard Artist

	 BURN-E (2008) - Director, Story, Voice of BURN-E

	 Up (2009) - Animator

	 Toy Story 3 (2010) - Animator

	 Small Fry (2011) - Director, Writer, Voice of T-Bone / Super Pirate / Funky Monk / Gary Grappling Hook

	 Toy Story of Terror! (2013) - Director, Writer, Voice of Officer Wilson

	 Finding Dory (2016) - Co-Director

Recognition

	 2005, Won Annie Award for 'Character Animation' for The Incredibles

	 2014, Won Annie Award for 'Outstanding Achievement in Directing ' for Toy Story of Terror


