
#Article: David Perdue
#Type: regular article

David Alfred Perdue, Jr. (born December 10, 1949) is an American politician who is the junior United States Senator from Georgia, having been elected to the seat previously held by Senator Saxby Chambliss who retired. Perdue won the most votes in the Republican primary election in Georgia on May 20, 2014, and defeated Representative Jack Kingston in the runoff on July 22, 2014. Perdue defeated Democratic nominee Michelle Nunn on November 4, 2014, and took office on January 3, 2015.

Early life and education

Perdue was born in Macon, the son of David Alfred Perdue, Sr., and the former Gervaise Wynn, both schoolteachers. He was raised in Warner Robins. He lives with his wife, Bonnie Dunn Perdue, in the resort town of Sea Island. The couple have two sons, David A. Perdue III and Blake Perdue, and three grandchildren. He is the first cousin of former Georgia governor Sonny Perdue. Perdue has a bachelor's degree in industrial engineering (1972) and a master's degree in operations research (1975), both from Georgia Tech. At Georgia Tech, Perdue was a brother of the Delta Sigma Phi Fraternity.

Business career

Perdue began his career at Kurt Salmon Associates, an international consulting firm, where he worked for twelve years as a management consultant. His first major corporate job was as senior vice president of Asia operations for Sara Lee Corporation, a position he took in 1992. His time at Sara Lee was followed by a stint at Haggar Clothing, where he became senior vice president of operations in 1994.

In 1998, Perdue joined Reebok as a senior vice president, eventually rising to president and CEO. Perdue is credited with significantly reducing the company's debt and reviving its sneaker line. Perdue negotiated a contract with the National Football League that a former Reebok executive referred to as "revolutionary" for repositioning the company's shoe brand.

In 2002, Perdue left Reebok for Pillowtex, a North Carolina textile company. The company had recently emerged from bankruptcy with a heavy debt load and an underfunded pension liability. Perdue was unable to obtain additional funding from the company's investors and later was unsuccessful in finding a buyer for the company. He left the company in 2003 after nine months on the job and $1.7 million in compensation. Pillowtex closed several months later, leaving 7,650 workers out of work nationwide. With more than 4,000 jobs lost statewide, it was the largest single day job loss in North Carolina history at the time.

After leaving Pillowtex, Perdue became CEO of Dollar General. Prior to his joining the company, it had recently overstated profits by $100 million and paid $162 million to settle shareholder lawsuits. Perdue overhauled the company's inventory line and logistics network and updated its marketing strategy. After initially closing hundreds of stores, the company doubled its stock price and opened 2,600 new stores before being sold in 2007 to private equity investors.

From 2007 to 2009, Perdue worked as a senior consultant for Indian chemical textile conglomerate Gujarat Heavy Chemicals Ltd. In April 2011, Perdue started an Atlanta-based global trading firm.

According to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, Perdue is "known on Wall Street as a turnaround specialist who helps revive brands and reap rewards for investors."

U.S. Senate

2014 Senate campaign

Perdue touted his business experience, and particularly his experience at Dollar General, in running for office. According to Perdue: "We added about 2,200 stores, created almost 20,000 jobs and doubled the value of that company in a very short period of time. Not because of me, but because we listened to our customers and employees.” He received the endorsement of the National Federation of Independent Business.

Perdue's political opponents targeted his business career during the campaign, specifically for outsourcing work, which Perdue stated he was "proud of", and for the job losses that followed the final closure of Pillowtex. After being elected, David Perdue stated that he wanted to bring the perspective of a working person to Washington D.C.

The race was considered to be a competitive race. Perdue won the general election, defeating the Democratic nominee Michelle Nunn 52.89% to 45.21%.

Committee assignments

	 Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry

	Subcommittee on Commodities, Markets, Trade and Risk Management

	Subcommittee on Conservation, Forestry and Natural Resources (Chair)

	Subcommittee on Jobs, Rural Economic Growth and Energy Innovation

	 Committee on the Budget

	 Committee on Foreign Relations

	Subcommittee on Near East, South Asia, Central Asia and Counterterrorism

	Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere, Transnational Crime, Civilian Security, Democracy, Human Rights and Global Women's Issues

	Subcommittee on State Department and USAID Management, International Operations and Bilateral International Development

	Subcommittee on International Development, Multilateral Institutions and International Economic, Energy and Environmental Policy

	 Committee on the Judiciary

	Subcommittee on Antitrust, Competition Policy and Consumer Rights

	Subcommittee on Immigration and The National Interest

	Subcommittee on Privacy, Technology and the Law

	 Special Committee on Aging

Political positions

Perdue stated that he entered politics out of concern for the rising national debt. He supports repealing and replacing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. He also supports a constitutional balanced budget amendment and comprehensive tax reform. In addition, he has pledged to limit himself to two terms in the Senate, equivalent to 12 years, if elected.


