
#Article: Isa Mustafa
#Type: regular article

Isa Mustafa (; born 15 May 1951) is the Prime Minister of the Republic of Kosovo and leader of the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK). Mustafa was Mayor of Prishtina from December 2007 to December 2013.

Early life

Mustafa was born in the village of Prapashtica, in the Gollak Highlands of Prishtina, Kosovo on 15 May 1951, to Albanian parents. He finished Primary and High School in Prishtina, and attended the University of Prishtina in the Faculty of Economics, where he obtained a master's degree and a PhD. In 1974, he began his professional work, as an examiner at the University of Prishtina.

Political career

Isa Mustafa began his political career on the 1980s, when he became the head of the municipal government of Prishtina, from 1984 to 1988. In the 1990s, as Yugoslavia started to break up, Mustafa became the Minister of Economy and Finances of the government of the Republic of Kosova, in exile, headed by Bujar Bukoshi. During this time, an arrest warrant for Mustafa was issued within Yugoslavia - which did not become international, making possible his work in Western Europe. Mustafa did not apply for any political asylum, and was able to return to Kosovo anytime if needed.

After the Kosovo War ended on 1999, he returned home, but returned to politics only in 2006 as a High Political Advisor of the then President of Kosovo, Fatmir Sejdiu.

In December 2007, he became the mayor of Prishtina in local elections, beating the vice president of the Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) and one of the ex-commanders of the Kosovo Liberation Army (UÇK), Fatmir Limaj. He became Mayor of Prishtina for the second time, in November 2009.

On 7 November 2010, he became the leader of the Democratic League of Kosovo, beating Fatmir Sejdiu in the party leadership election by 235 votes to 124 votes.

On 1 December 2013, he lost re-election to the position of Mayor of Prishtina, in what was seen as a major upset, to upcoming politician Shpend Ahmeti. The upset was especially dramatic seeing as it happened in what had been historically known as a Democratic League of Kosovo stronghold.

On 8 December 2014, he became the Prime Minister of Kosovo in a coalition with the Democratic Party of Kosovo. With a PhD in Economics, he claimed that his government will be focused on the economic development of the country.

While addressing the Assembly of Kosovo on 22 September 2015 on an agreement with Serbia on autonomy for Kosovo's ethnic Serb minority and another agreement defining the border between Kosovo and Montenegro, Mustafa was pelted with eggs by opposition Assembly lawmakers. He later continued his address while being shielded with an umbrella by his bodyguards.

== Government == (as of 16 February 2015)

	 Isa Mustafa - Prime Minister

	 Hashim Thaçi - Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs 

	 Kujtim Shala - Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Culture 

	 Mahir Yağcilar - Minister for Public Administration 

	 Arsim Bajrami - Minister for Education, Science and Technology

	 Valon Murati - Minister for Diaspora

	 Hajredin Kuçi - Minister for Justice

	 Avdullah Hoti - Minister for Finance

	 Blerand Stavileci - Minister for Economic Development

	 Bekim Çollaku - Minister for European Integrations

	 Haki Demolli - Minister for Kosovo Security Forces

	 Ferid Agani - Minister for Environment and Spatial Planning

	 Arban Abrashi - Minister for Labor and Social Welfare

	 Edita Tahiri - Minister without Portfolio

	 Rasim Demiri - Minister without Portfolio

	 Memli Krasniqi - Minister for Agriculture

	 Skender Hyseni - Minister for Internal Affairs

	 Imet Rrahmani - Minister for Health

	 Hykmete Bajrami - Minister for Trade and Industry

	 Lutfi Zharku - Minister of Infrastructure

Personal life

Mustafa is married to Qevsere Mustafa and has three children, two sons and a daughter.

Notes and references

Notes:

References:


