
#Article: Aimee Winder Newton
#Type: regular article

Aimee Winder Newton is an American politician and member of the Salt Lake County Council representing the 3rd district. Newton was elected with 78% of the vote in a special election on January 9, 2014 to succeed David Wilde, who had stepped down for health reasons. She won a four-year term of her own on November 4, 2014 with 56% of the vote against former Murray City mayor, Dan Snarr. Her council district includes portions of Murray, Taylorsville, West Jordan, West Valley City, South Salt Lake and Millcreek. She is the first female Republican to serve on the Salt Lake County Council.

Newton has been elected by as Salt Lake County Council Pro Tem, and represents the council on the boards of the Jordan River Commission and Wasatch Front Waste and Recycling District. In September 2014 she launched the county's involvement in an anti-pornography education program for area teens.

Background and Family

Newton grew a mortgage business and started Figco, Inc., her own communications firm. She is the founder of Citizens Supporting a Strong Taylorsville, and was the first director of communications for Taylorsville City. Newton served as vice-chair for the Taylorsville Economic Development committee, the public-relations and advertising director of the Taylorsville Incorporation Committee, eight years as a planning commissioner, and five years on the Granite School District Community Council. She graduated from Taylorsville High School, Ricks College and the University of Utah, where she received her BS in Mass Communications.

Newton and her husband, Matt, have been married for over 20 years and have four children. Her father Kent Winder is a Granger-Hunter Improvement District trustee and was elected to Taylorsville's first City Council; mother Sherri Winder worked for Utah Governor Jon Huntsman and was U.S. Rep. Jason Chaffetz's office manager in West Jordan; and younger brother Mike Winder was mayor of West Valley City. In 2011, her mother Sherri died in an automobile accident near St. George, Utah. In 2014, her youngest brother Isaac Winder died of an illness while living in Changchun, China.


