
#Article: Gilles Marini
#Type: regular article

Gilles Marini  (born January 26, 1976) is a French-American actor, known for his roles in the film Sex and the City and in the American television shows Brothers & Sisters and Switched at Birth. He was also the runner-up in season 8 of Dancing with the Stars, and was one of the returning celebrities in season 15. Gilles guest starred in Lifetimes Devious Maids season 2 then returned season 3 as main cast portraying Sebastien Dussault, 2014-2015.

Early life

Marini was born in Grasse, Alpes-Maritimes, France to a Greek mother and Italian father. After working as a baker in his father's bakery since he was eight years old and high school, he joined the French army and was stationed in Paris, where he served as a fireman in the Paris Fire Brigade. It was in Paris where Marini met Fred Goudon, a photographer who introduced him to the world of modeling. After fulfilling his military duties, he went to the United States to learn English while working as a model. He began his career as a model in his early twenties. One of his first jobs was a television commercial for Bud Light beer. He made his acting debut at the age of 29, in the 2005 horror flick Screech of the Decapitated.

Career

He played Dante in Sex and the City: The Movie, and has appeared on Brothers & Sisters, Ugly Betty, Dirty Sexy Money, Criminal Minds, Nip/Tuck, The Bold and the Beautiful, Passions, and 2 Broke Girls. His film credits include One and the Other (L'Une et L'Autre) and The Boys & Girls Guide to Getting Down. On February 8, 2009, it was announced that Marini would participate in the eighth season of Dancing with the Stars. His professional partner was Cheryl Burke. He also took part in the fifteenth season of Dancing with the Stars for another chance to win the mirrorball trophy. He danced with season fourteen winner, Peta Murgatroyd. They were the eighth couple eliminated from the competition, alongside Kirstie Alley and Maksim Chmerkovskiy.

He was introduced as a recurring character on ABC's hit family drama Brothers & Sisters. He played Luc Laurent, the French love interest of Rachel Griffiths' character Sarah Walker in what was originally was supposed to be a five episode arc, but was promoted to a series regular. The series was cancelled in May 2011, after the fifth season ended. He also appears as Bay Kennish's biological father, Angelo Sorrento, in Switched at Birth. On September 18, it was announced that he would become a series regular for the second season. In season three episode sixteen, the character of Angelo Sorrento died due to injuries he sustained in an automobile accident due to an aneurysm. Marini will possibly make occasional appearances in flashbacks or fantasy appearances about how he may have been had he been alive.

Dancing with the Stars performances

Gilles and his professional partner, Cheryl Burke came in as the runners-up of the American televised ballroom dancing competition, Dancing with the Stars. On May 19, 2009, then seventeen-year-old gymnast Shawn Johnson and her partner, Mark Ballas were crowned champions of that season, defeating Marini & Burke by 1%.

Season 8: with professional dance partner Cheryl Burke

Season average: 28.1

Season 15: with professional dance partner Peta Murgatroyd

	 Additional score from guest judge: singer, dancer and choreographer Paula Abdul.

	 For that week's salsa trio challenge, Marini & Murgatroyd chose Chelsie Hightower to dance alongside them.

Personal life

Marini married his wife, Carole, in 1998. They have two children, a son Georges (born 1998) and a daughter, Julianna (born 2006).

Filmography


