
#Article: Destin Sandlin
#Type: regular article

Destin Wilson Sandlin, born 1981, is an American engineer and YouTube Educator. He resides in Alabama and produces the educational video series Smarter Every Day.

Education and Career

Sandlin attended the University of Alabama as an undergraduate, where he studied mechanical engineering. He later obtained a graduate degree in Aerospace Engineering from the University of Alabama in Huntsville. While an undergraduate, he was awarded the University of Alabama's Outstanding Senior Award. He is currently a Missile Flight Test Engineer at Redstone Arsenal.

Smarter Every Day

Sandlin is the creator of the YouTube channel Smarter Every Day. He has credited his fascination with the scientific method and his job as a rocket engineer for having inspired him to make educational videos. Most episodes of Smarter Every Day feature scientific experiments with Sandlin hosting or narrating. He has demonstrated experiments such as tracking the movement patterns of a chicken’s head, a do-it-yourself high-speed camera, and other content designed to educate viewers on a variety of scientific topics. As of 2015, the channel has over 3.3 million subscribers and 233 million views.

History

Smarter Every Day was originally called Pennywhistle Productions.

On July 10, 2009 Destin had his first video reach 1 million views.  The video was about chicken head tracking using some chickens that Destin bought for his father as a demonstration. Because of its popularity this video retroactively had Smarter Every Day added to its name. Mercedes-Benz capitalized on the popularity of this video in their "MAGIC BODY CONTROL TV commercial Chicken".

On Apr 24, 2011, starting with a video entitled "Detonation vs Deflagration - Smarter Every Day 1," Destin officially began the web-series, Smarter Every Day, which has now taken over the whole identity of his YouTube channel.

Channel Statistics

Interesting Facts

Destin features a Bible verse at the end of each episode of Smarter Every Day, usually Psalm 111:2 because it is featured on the doors to Cavendish Laboratory, but many other verses have also been used.

Beliefs

Sandlin credits his grandfather for having shaped his world view and for encouraging his love of science. He is Christian.

Family

He is married with four children, two daughters and two sons.


