
#Article: Ekong Jimmy Effiong
#Type: regular article

Dr. Ekong Jimmy Effiong (born 21 December 1957) is a teacher by profession and a civil servant by career. He is at present a Permanent Secretary in the service of Akwa Ibom state Government, Nigeria.

Early life

Effiong was born on 21 December 1957 in Obong Itam, Itu local government area of Akwa Ibom state, Nigeria - where he grew up. He is of the Ibibio tribe and a native of Ikot Ukap Itam in Itu local government area of Akwa Ibom state. His parents: Jimmy and Jenny were traders.

Education

He began his educational pursuit in 1963 at Government Primary School, Ikot Andem Itam, Itu local government area of Akwa Ibom state. He moved to County Council School, Eman Itam, Itu (1964) and Presbyterian School, Ikot Oporo-Ediene in Ikono local government area (1965). In 1967 he transferred back to Government Primary School, Ikot Andem Itam where he won his first school leaving certificate in 1970. His movement from school to school was as a result of staying with his maternal uncle - Akan Ekong; who was a school teacher.

He attended Itam Secondary School, Obong Itam, Itu local government area from 1971 to 1975 where he obtained his West African School Certificate.

In 1977, he gained admission into the Federal College of Education (Technical), Akoka, Yaba, graduating with the Nigeria Certificate of Education (Technical) in 1980.

He holds a BSc. (Ed.) Technical Vocational Education, M.Ed. and Ph.D. in Technical Education all from the University of Nigeria, Nsukka which he obtained in 1987, 1997 and 2006 respectively.

Family and personal life

Effiong and his wife Eno have four children: Mfon-Obong, a medical doctor; Ti-Abasi, an engineer; Kukpongobong, a student of sociology and Yire-Obong, a student of engineering.

Career and employment

Before taking up teaching as a profession, Effiong worked as a Clerical Staff with the defunct African Continental Bank Ltd, Benin City in 1976 and Maintenance/Operation Technician with the Nigerian Television Authority, Yola in 1980 as a National Youth Service Corps member.

He began his teaching work at Government Technical College, Ikot Ada Idem, Akwa Ibom state. He also taught at St. Patrick’s Technical College Ugep and St. Patrick’s College, Ikot Ansa, Calabar all in Cross River state before going back to Akwa Ibom state where he taught at Secondary School Ekit Itam II and Community High School Edem Urua. He served as College Principal at Community Technical College Ikot Akata.

Effiong transferred his services to the mainstream of Akwa Ibom state civil service as Education Officer, serving in the State Ministry of Education headquarters and State Technical Schools Board headquarters. He rose to the rank of Director of Education in 2007.

In 2013, he was appointed Permanent Secretary in the service of Akwa Ibom State Government. As Permanent Secretary, he has served in the Akwa Ibom State Technical Schools Board (2013); Ministry of Science and Technology (2014) and Ministry of Agriculture (2014).

Religious views

Ekong Jimmy Effiong is a Christian and a member of the Church of Christ(Churches of Christ). He is an Elder of the church at 20, Paul Bassey Street, Uyo, Akwa Ibom state. He believes true worshippers of God are those who worship God in spirit and in truth and contribute positively to the peaceful co-existence of mankind.

Honours and awards

	 Outstanding Permanent Secretaries Merit Award by the House of Representatives (Nigeria) Committee on Governmental Affairs, 2014.

	 Best Public Servant Award, Akwa Ibom state by Office of the Head of Service, Akwa Ibom state, 2012.

	 Nigerian Gold Merit Award for Transparency and Accountability by Elite Magazine, 2010.

	 African Credibility Award by Platinum Standard Publications Ltd, 2009.

	 Certificate of Honours by the National Association of Teachers of Technology for positive contribution to technical education, 1999.

Membership of professional associations

	 Member, Philosophy of Education Association of Nigeria

	 Member, National Association for Advancement of Knowledge

	 Member, National Association of Teachers of Technology

	 Member, Nigerian Vocational Association

	 Fellow, Institute of Public Diplomacy and Management

Publications

Notes and references


