
#Article: Deepak Dinkar
#Type: regular article

Deepak Dinkar is a film actor and leading Tamil television actor. He is known for his role as Tamil in the Tamil prime time Megaserial on Sun TV Thendral. He is a television host for various shows including Jodi Number One.

Personal life

Deepak did his school in gill adarsh and was a student in Economics in Loyala College. He is married to S. Sivaranjini and has a son named Agnidh.

Career

Deepak started his career as a participant in Jodi Number One in the first season and later became a host in the second season in Vijay TV. He has acted in various many serials including Thendral. He has acted in films including Uyarthiru 420. He was the male lead in a film called in Ivanuku Thannila Gandam.

Serials and Films

Serials

Tele serials

	 Sharada (Raj TV)

	 Rakkai Katiya Manasu ( Raj TV)

	 Geetanjali (Raj TV)

	 Agni Satchi (Vijay TV)

	 Jenman- X ( Vijay TV)

	 Butterflies (Vijay TV)

	 Arasi (Sun TV)

	 Malargal ( Sun TV)

	 Manaivi (Sun TV)

	 Bandam (Sun TV)

	 Vaira Nenjam ( Kalaignar TV)

	 Nila (Kailangar TV)

	 Kadhal (Captain TV)

Movies acted in

	 Kadhal Virus (2002)

	 Ilasu Pudhusu Ravusu (2003)

	 Saroja (2008)

	 Mundhinam Paartheney (2010)

	 Uyarthiru 420 (2011)

	 Ivanuku Thannila Gandam (2015)

Movies Dubbed for

	 Uyir ezhuthu

	 Naam

	 Album

Reality Shows

	 Jodi no 1 - Season 1 as Performer (Vijay Tv)

	 Jodi No 1 - Season 2 , 3 & 4 as Anchor (Vijay Tv)

	 Boys vs Girls -Season 1 & 2 as Anchor (Vijay Tv)

	 Super Kudumbam - Season 1 & 2 as Anchor (Sun Tv)

Live Shows

	 Vijay Jodi (Vijay Tv)

	 Jodi no 1 - Season 4 Grand Finale (Vijay Tv)

	 Sun Kudumbam Virudugal - 2013 & 2014

Corporate shows

	 Nokia (Annual day)

	 Pride Hotels (New Year)

	 Jennys Club- Coimbatore (New Year) 

	 Ebay Paypal (Annual day)

	 Promotion of Surya Kathir Magazine

	 Annual event of Tamil Nadu Arya Vaishya Mahila Sabha

	 Round Table 107 (Pondicherry) - Annual Event

	 Tamil Sangam of Chicago Illinois

Awards and Recognitions

	 Won the Ehrlich Subramanian Silver Trophy for best actor by The Mylapore Academy for the year 2010

	 recognised by The Punjab Association as the " Jewel in the crown of Adarsh"

	 Won the Best jodi award by Sun tv for the serial Thendral for the year 2013 and 2014

	 Won the best lead role - male by sun tv for the serial Thendral for the year 2014

Trivia

	 Actors Subhalekha Sudhakar and Deepak Dinkar who play father in law and son in law in the serial Thendral also played father and son years earlier in the serial Anni.

	 Deepak played dual roles as identical twins in the serial Selvi in which one twin is good and one twin is evil.

	 In serials, Deepak is notable for playing both positive roles like the roles he had in Anni and Thendral and negative roles like the roles he had in Selvi and Thirumathi Selvam.


