
#Article: Aigboje Aig-Imoukhuede
#Type: regular article

Aigboje Aig-Imoukhuede is a Nigerian banker, entrepreneur, investor and philanthropist.

Career

After qualifying as a lawyer, Aig joined Continental Merchant Bank (Chase Nigeria) followed by Prime Merchant Bank and moved to Guaranty Trust Bank (GTB) in 1991 where he remained for 11 years, being appointed Executive Director in 2000.

He resigned from GTB in 2002, and with his business partner Herbert Wigwe, arranged the financing and acquisition of Access Bank Plc. During his tenure the bank acquired Intercontinental Bank, a large but failing Nigerian bank. Standard & Poors upgraded the bank's credit rating in September 2013, and Access Bank became the fifth largest bank operating in Nigeria.

In December 2013 Aig voluntary retired as CEO, handing over to his successor Wigwe.

Aig is the founding Chairman of the FMDQ an Over-the-counter exchange that specialises in fixed income securities and derivatives. He is the  President of the Nigerian Stock Exchange, where he chairs the Governance as well as Technical Committees of Council. He is also the Chairman of the Financial Markets Dealers Association Board of Trustees. As a result of his private equity and venture capital interests, Aig sits on the Boards of WAPIC Insurance Plc, Associated Discount House and African Finance Corporation.

In 2012 Aig was appointed by Nigerian President Goodluck Jonathan to chair the Presidential Committee on the Verification of Fuel Subsidies, which saved billions of dollars in fraudulent fuel subsidy payments.

As Chairman of the Bankers Committee Sub-Committee on Economic Development he convinced Nigerian Banks to adopt the Nigerian Sustainable Banking Principles, a voluntary code of practice for sustainable banking.

He is a member of the National Economic Management Team (NEMT) and has served on several other national committees and initiatives focused on the progress and wellbeing of Nigeria.

Philanthropic work

Aig is the first African Co-Chairman of the Global Business Coalition on Health (GBC Health) and the Chairman of Friends of the Global Fund - Africa (Friends Africa). In 2010 he announced a $1 million contribution to the Global Fund, and has since mobilised millions of dollars in donations to the Global Fund through the 'Gift from Africa' campaign.

Aig is also involved in pastoral duties at the Promised Land Pentecostal Ministry.

Awards and recognition

He was the recipient of Commander of the Order of the Niger in 2011, as well as the National Productivity Order of Merit Award (2009). In 2011 he was inaugurated into the Ernst and Young World Entrepreneurs Hall of Fame as the Ernst & Young West Africa Entrepreneur of the Year, and is also an awardee of the African Bank of the Year Award (2013).


