
#Article: Shyam Mardikar
#Type: regular article

 Shyam Prabhakar Mardikar (born 23 March 1971) is The Chief - Strategy, Architecture & Engineering at Bharti Airtel (India), an Indian multinational telecommunications services company, headquartered in New Delhi, India with operations in 20 countries.

Personal background

Shyam Prabhakar Mardikar was born on 23 March 1971 in Jabalpur. Shyam attended various schools in Madhya Pradesh including Holy Cross Convent in Raipur, Miss Hill School in Gwalior and St Xavier's in Sarguja (now Chhattisgarh). He received his Bachelors in Telecommunications Engineering from Rani Durgavati University in Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh. Shyam loves to travel and read. His most liked authors being Agatha Christie, Ayn Rand and P. G. Wodehouse.

Career

Shyam started his career in 1994 with C-DOT as a software research engineer and held various operational and management positions in Airtel. He also served as Deputy General Manager in Department of Telecomunications, India.He was also a member of GSMA's executive management committee.While talking about managed services for telecom sector in his first stint at airtel, Shyam was quoted saying, “Telecom sells like fish” but the operators have found that it is more cost beneficial to employ fishermen to catch the fish and for them to focus on marketing it. 

Shyam moved out of Airtel later in 2010 and joined Lebara group as The Chief Technology Officer. He was based out of London; where he was responsible for implementation & execution of the Company's technology strategy and aligning the Technology Vision with the Business Strategy across its 7 countries.

In his current role at Bharti Airtel, Shyam is The Chief of Strategy, Architecture and Engineering and is responsible for transforming the network architecture to a next generation, mobile broad band enabled, data services centric network. He is also instrumental in driving the overall strategy on the technology standards across different domains to ensure sustaining Airtel's leadership position on the technology front and set the benchmark standards for the industry.Along with his existing role at Bharti Airtel, Shyam currently chairs the technology committee of Cellular Operators Association of India

Telecom Summit Presence

	VAS ASIA 2014 

	LTE INDIA 2014 

	TD-LTE Summit 2013 

	4G World India Expo & Conference 

	Broadband Tech India 2013 

	VAS Asia 2013 

	VAS India 2010 

	23rd Convergence India 2015 Expo 

	Vision 4G LTE Telecom Conclave 

	LTE India 2015 


