
#Article: Serena Shim
#Type: regular article

Serena Shim (سيرينا علي سحيم, Serena Ali Suhaim; October 10, 1985 - October 19, 2014) was an American journalist. While covering the Siege of Kobanê as a war correspondent for Press TV, she was killed in a car crash. Her employer called the accident "suspicious".

Biography

Serena Shim, a 29-year-old American citizen of Lebanese origin covered reports for Press TV in Lebanon, Iraq, Turkey and Ukraine. She was married and had 2 children.

Covering the siege of Kobanê

In October 2014, Shim was sent to Turkey on a mission to cover the ISIL conflict. She was based in a rural district near the Syrian border, Suruç, Urfa Province.

	Accusation of spying by Turkey

On October 17, Shim told Press TV that the Turkish National Intelligence Organization (MİT) had accused her of "spying". She stated that it is "probably due to some of the stories she had covered about Turkey's stance on the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant militants in Kobanê". She had reported that ISIL militants being smuggled over the Turkish border into Syria on trucks bearing the symbols of NGOs like the "World Food Organisation". Shim, said  she's "a bit frightened" by what MİT "might use against me."

Death

She died on October 19, 2014 on her way back to her hotel. She was returning to Suruç with her cousin Judy Irish, in a rental car which collided with a heavy vehicle (a cement mixer, according to Hürriyet). Shim died in the crash and her cousin Judy Irish was injured and taken to Suruç State Hospital.According to the daily Hürriyet, citing the Turkish Doğan News Agency, the vehicle driver was subsequently arrested. Press TV disputed this, alleging that both driver and vehicle "have disappeared" and her death is "suspicious".

Şanlıurfa Governor İzzettin Küçük, denied Press TV's claims calling them "completely baseless" and "attempts to put Turkey in a difficult situation". Küçük stated that a detailed statement will be made after the investigations.

Her funeral ceremony was held on October 22, in a hussainia in Bourj el-Barajneh before she was buried in a cemetery in the same district.


