
#Article: Ned Luke
#Type: regular article

Ned Luke (born October 4, 1958) is an American actor, best known for his role as Michael De Santa in the 2013 video game Grand Theft Auto V as well as his role as Raffles in the animated movie Rover Dangerfield. He has appeared in 29 movies and television shows to date.

Early life

Ned Luke was born in Danville, Illinois to Cindy (née Smith) and Fred Luke. He is the grandson of Golden Age actor Paul Birch. He graduated from Danville High School in 1977 where he was a bi-sport athlete and honor student. He later attended the University of Illinois in Champaign, Illinois. He has four siblings.

Career

Luke's first major voice-over role was in Rover Dangerfield, where he played a sheepdog named Raffles opposite Rodney Dangerfield. He was cast as a guest star in several TV shows throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, and has appeared in about 100 television commercials featuring products such as Budweiser and Burger King. 

In 2007, having grown disenchanted with show business and desiring that his son experience where he grew up, Luke decided to take a break from acting and moved his family from Los Angeles to his hometown of Danville, where he opened a restaurant with his brother. After two years, he decided to return to acting and he and his family returned to New York. His agent suggested he audition for the role of one of three protagonists of Rockstar Games' newest entry in the popular Grand Theft Auto series. Luke initially balked at the idea of being in a video game, but after reading the script decided to proceed with the audition. Luke was eventually cast as one of the game's three protagonists, Michael de Santa. The game went on to set several sales records and has become the highest grossing video game in history. 

Personal life

Luke married yoga instructor and part-time actress Amy Sax on November 12, 1997. They have one son and live in Westchester County, New York. Luke is nearly deaf in his right ear.

Filmography

Television

Films

Video games


