
#Article: Sarah Treem
#Type: regular article

Sarah Treem is an American TV writer-producer and playwright. She is the co-creator and showrunner of the Golden Globe-winning drama “The Affair,” which won the award for Outstanding Drama Series and was a writer and co-executive producer on the inaugural season of “House of Cards,” which was nominated for nine Golden Globes, including Outstanding Drama Series. She also wrote on all three seasons of the acclaimed HBO series “In Treatment.” 

Early life

Treem was born in Boston, Massachusetts, to a mother who works as a consultant/angel investor and advisor to start-ups and to a father who is a pediatric gastroenterologist. She grew up in New Hampshire, Philadelphia, Washington D.C., Connecticut, and North Carolina with her parents and brother. Treem considers New Haven to be her home town.

Treem has been writing from a very young age, beginning with poetry when she was 8. When she was 12, Treem's first play won a young playwrights contest and was staged in Connecticut. She continued to write during high school and college.

Treem has a 2002 B.A. from Yale College, where she was in the residential college Branford College, and a 2005 M.F.A. from Yale School of Drama. During college Treem interned at New Dramatists.

Career

Having started her career in theater, playwright Sarah Treem’s most recent stage production, WHEN WE WERE YOUNG AND UNAFRAID, ran in summer 2014, starred Cherry Jones and was directed by Pam MacKinnon. Treem’s play, A FEMININE ENDING premiered at Playwrights Horizons and went on to have productions at South Coast Repertory and Portland Center Stage, among others. Her play THE HOW AND THE WHY premiered at the McCarter Theater starring Mercedes Ruehl with Emily Mann directing and went on to productions at Interact Theatre and Trinity Repertory, to name a few. Treem's other plays include EMPTY SKY (Bloomington Playwrights Project), ORPHAN ISLAND (Sundance Theater Lab), HUMAN VOICES (New York Stage and Film) and MIRROR MIRROR. 

Treem’s work in television began on the HBO series acclaimed series “In Treatement.” She then moved on to writing and co-executive producing the incredibly successful political drama, “House of Cards.” In 2014, Treem co-created the hit Showtime series “The Affair,” which looks at the psychological effects of an affair between a married waitress at a Hamptons diner and a teacher who spends his summer at his in-laws' estate on the island. The series tells the same story from multiple perspectives and won the Golden Globe Award for Outstanding Drama series in 2015. Treem said that "the concept is that two people can be in the same conversation and have radically different experiences." In addition to her Golden Globe win, Treem’s work has earned her nominations for the Humanitas Prize, Primetime Emmy Awards and four Writers Guild Awards, including two wins for New Series for “House of Cards” and “In Treatment.”

As of February 2014, Treem is adapting the memoir Until I Say Good-Bye: My Year of Living with Joy, by Susan Spencer-Wendel. The book deals with coping with the disease Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and will be a Universal Studios feature film.

Writing style

All of Treem's plays have a high percentage of women roles. Treem has forged ongoing creative relationships with actresses like Zoe Kazan (who knew each other from Yale) and Allison Pill.

Filmography

	 2008-10: In Treatment (HBO) - co-producer; supervising producer; writer

	 2010: How to Make It in America (HBO) - producer; writer

	 2013: House of Cards (Netflix) - co-executive producer; writer

	 2014: The Affair (Showtime) - creator; executive producer; writer

Awards

	 2008: Nominated for Humanitas Prize, 30 Minute Category, for In Treatment episode "Sophie Week 2."

	 2009: Won Writers Guild of America Award, New Series, for In Treatment

	 2013: Nominated for Primetime Emmy, Outstanding Drama Series, for House of Cards

	 2014: Won Writers Guild of America Award, New Series, for House of Cards - with Kate Barnow, Rick Cleveland, Sam Forman, Gina Gionfriddo, Keith Huff, Beau Willimon

	 2014: Won Golden Globe Award, Best TV Series, Drama, for The Affair

Personal life

On June 21, 2014, Treem married Jay Carson, a producer and former campaign spokesman for Howard Dean and Hillary Clinton. They have a son and live in Topanga, California.

Works or publications

Plays

	 Treem, Sarah. A Feminine Ending. New York, NY: Samuel French, 2008. ISBN 978-0-573-65235-6

	 Treem, Sarah. Against The Wall.

	 Treem, Sarah. Empty Sky.

	 Treem, Sarah. Human Voices.

	 Treem, Sarah. Mirror, Mirror. New York, NY: Samuel French, 2010. ISBN 978-0-573-69826-2

	 Treem, Sarah. Orphan Island.

	 Treem, Sarah. The How and the Why. New York, NY: Dramatists Play Service, 2013. ISBN 978-0-822-22731-1

	 Treem, Sarah. When We Were Young and Unafraid.


