
#Article: Jonathan Oppenheimer
#Type: regular article

Jonathan M. E. Oppenheimer (born 18 November 1969) is a South African businessman who has spent most of his working life in the Anglo American Corporation and De Beers diamond mining company.

Early life

Jonathan is the son of the former Chairman of De Beers Nicky Oppenheimer, and great-grandson of Ernest Oppenheimer, founder of the Anglo American Corporation and the first generation of the family to chair (from 1929) the De Beers diamond mining company in South Africa which was established by Cecil John Rhodes in 1888. Jonathan Oppenheimer was educated at Harrow School and Christ Church, Oxford.

Business career

Jonathan Oppenheimer began his career working at N M Rothschild & Sons, before moving to Anglo American where he became Senior Vice President in 1999. After leaving Anglo American in 2000 he filled numerous senior roles within De Beers including leading the strategic review of Debid (now Element Six) (2000-2001) after which he became Chairman until 2012; leading Producer Relations (Africa) (2001-2004), responsible for the management of producer and Government relations; Managing Director of De Beers Consolidated Mines (2004- 2006), and Head of the Chairman’s Office (2006-2012), responsible for the direction and implementation of group strategy. He was also involved in the transactions to delist De Beers in 2001 and to sell the Oppenheimer family stake to Anglo American in 2012. He is currently the Director of E. Oppenheimer & Son Ltd.

Other Activities

Jonathan Oppenheimer has been involved in many aspects of the family’s activities. Most notable of these has been the establishment of the Brenthurst Foundation, a Johannesburg-based think-tank which examines ways to drive Africa’s sustainable growth, and the formation of Tana Africa Capital, a joint venture between the Oppenheimer family and Temasek Holdings (Singapore) to pursue business opportunities across the continent in the consumer goods space. Jonathan has sat on a number of Boards and Advisory Panels including the Presidential Advisory Committee on the Economy (Malawi), established by the Brenthurst Foundation; and Umicore, a listed specialty chemicals company, as a non-executive Director.

Personal life

Jonathan is married to Jennifer Ward, with whom he has three children. He is passionate about flying, an active golfer and enjoys engaging on issues of African development.

See also

	Harry Oppenheimer

	Ernest Oppenheimer

	Nicky Oppenheimer

	Mining industry of South Africa

	De Beers

	Brenthurst Foundation


