
#Article: Madhureeta Anand
#Type: regular article

Madhureeta Anand (born 22 May 1973) is an Indian film director, producer and screenwriter. She has written, produced and directed several documentary films, short films, TV series and two full-length feature films. Her first feature film ‘Mere Khwabon Mein Jo Aaye’, which she co-produced with PVR Pictures starring Randeep Hooda, Raima Sen and Arbaaz Khan released in 2009. She also founded and is the festival director of the 0110 International Digital Film Festival, the only digital film festival in India. The festival, started in collaboration with the British Council, Fame Cinemas and PVR Pictures, has well-known filmmakers and actors on its jury.Her second feature film, ‘Kajarya’, which explores the issue of female foeticide, is set for its theatrical release in India. The film was one of the three Indian films selected to be premiered at the 10th Dubai International Film Festival, 2013 that celebrated the 100 years of Indian cinema. Many of her films have won national and international awards.

Early life and education

Madhureeta Anand was born on 22 May 1973 in New Delhi. Her father was an army officer and her mother a Kathak dancer who worked in television as a producer. Her father Col. V.K Pachauri was posted to various cities like Delhi, Pune and Udhampur. After her father died she moved with her mother Sarita and elder sister Mandakini to New Delhi and studied at The Modern School, Barakhamba Road for four years. She was 11 years old when her mother remarried Maj. V.K. Anand. She then took her step father’s surname and went from being Madhureeta Pachauri to Madhureeta Anand. At age 11 she went to boarding school at The Lawrence School, Sanawar. She says, “It was a fortunate event that I ended up in a school that I loved and found friends that have become family. The school really shaped who I am”. After school she studied sociology at Delhi University but hardly spent any time in the classroom. Most of her years in college were spent volunteering at The Spastics Society and in the villages of Orissa where she spent time with activists working to protect the rights of the villagers. During this time she also learnt German, photography and did a course in International Relations. After her graduation she went to film school at the Jamia Milia Islamia University where she learnt the ropes of film making.

Personal life

Madhureeta was married in 1994 to Rohit Singh Negi, and subsequently divorced In 2005. After her separation she dated director Rajan Khosa for 3 years till 2007. It was rumoured that she dated actor Randeep Hooda for three years but she never publicly admitted to the relationship. She has a daughter Eka Kumari Singh who lives with her. She has two sisters Mandakini and Madhavi. She is currently single and living in New Delhi.

Career

Madhureeta Anand started her career making documentaries. Later she went on and worked for various television shows where she soon realized that Television was not for her. She then formed her own company and started producing and directing documentaries, short films and then feature films.

Documentaries and Short films

Most of her work has explored the areas of culture, religion and anthropology. Some of her films have looked at issues of education and child abuse in India. Her films have been telecast on international channels such as BBC, Channel 4, Discovery and National Geographic. These films also won her several national and international awards.

Most noted amongst her documentary films are ‘Education - A reality or a myth’ , documentary feature on the Kumbh Mela‐ ‘In Search of Salvation’ and ‘Laying Janaki to Rest’, a documentary film on Sita the Goddess.

In 2006 she wrote and directed her multiple award winning short film “Walking On A Moonbeam”.

The 0110 International Digital Film Festival

She is also the founder and festival director of the first Digital Film Festival in India - The 0110 International Digital Film Festival. The festival, started as collaboration with the British Council, Fame Cinemas and PVR Pictures, has well known filmmakers and actors on its jury.

Mere Khwabon Mein Jo Aaye

In 2007 she embarked on her first commercial feature film “Mere Khwabon Mein Jo Aaye” (The one she dreamt of). The film written, directed and executive produced by Madhureeta Anand in collaboration with PVR Pictures, and starred Raima Sen, Arbaaz Khan and Randeep Hooda. The film released on February 6, 2009.

Kajarya

Madhureeta Anand’s second feature film is titled “Kajarya”, has been listed as one of the five films to see in 2014 by Forbes (India) Magazine (http://forbesindia.com/printcontent/36783). And was described as, “An assured second feature, and a strong, original voice about female foeticide in India, the film questions notions of women’s emancipation, and explores how India lives in many centuries at the same time.”

This film has been making waves internationally and deals with the pertinent topic of sex selection in India. It is a thriller that pans across the city and village tells the story of two women who collide in a world where baby girls better be dead.

The film is co-produced by Bengali director Qaushiq Mukherjee popularly known as Q, Starfire movies and Madhureeta Anand’s company Ekaa Films. The film’s music has been scored by Richard Horowitz, who is a Golden Globe winner and an Academy Award nominee.

The film was seen by Eve Ensler (writer of The Vagina Monologues) and was greatly appreciated by her. The film has an all-new star cast of trained actors and explores the issue of female foeticide and related women’s issues.

	The film premiered at The Dubai International Film Festival as one of the 3 films that had its world premier there. 

	The Film’s Europe Premier took place in Geneva at The International Film Festival and Forum on Human Rights where Kajarya was one of the 8 films in competition. 

	The film was the opening film at Elles Tournet in Brussels, a prestigious women's film festival. 

	In addition, the film was selected at The Montreal World Film Festival. 

	Kajarya also won the “Best Foreign Film Award” at The Silk Road Film Festival in Xian, China. The festival had 140 films and Kajarya was the only Indian film to win an award.

	The film has since traveled to 10 other film festivals in America and Europe. 

	Kajarya was screened in Los Angeles at both The Lady Film Festival and The La Femme Film Festival.

The film trailer launched in New delhi, Jantar Mantar  and Madhureeta choose this place because Jantar Mantar is consider where all social movements have been launched. 

The Hollywood reporter review said, "Kajarya is both disturbing and engrossing as it plunges the viewer into the heart of darkness in an Indian village. Director Madhureeta Anand is a storyteller who interweaves the lives of two women - one modern, the other ancient."

Recurring themes

Most of Madhureeta’s films tend to have strong female characters in the narrative. Her strong sense of gender politics comes through in her stories. All the films directed by her have been written by her and tend to use an active, engaging narrative to go much deeper. Her films, typically take the audience into a world that women inhabit making storytelling both unique and incisive.

Future projects

She is currently working on a feature-length documentary on the “Naga Sadhvis” for the European theatrical network with Austria based production company Navigator Films.

Her next feature film is titled “Kotha No 22” (Brothel No 22), and is a thriller set in a brothel. Madhureeta will begin shooting the film in November 2014.

Awards and recognition

	 She is one of the fifteen women leaders from India listed in a book and exhibition titled “The Poetry Of Purpose” that will travel to several cities in India and the United States.

	 She won the Karamveer award for her work on social issues through films in March 2015

	 Her film ‘Walking on a Moonbeam’ won the Silver Conch at the Mumbai International Film Festival in 2006 

	 Her documentary ‘Education - A reality or a myth’ was nominated at the Zanzibar International Film Festival in 2002.

	 Her film titled ‘Sin’ was nominated in the Short Film section at The Damah Film Festival at Seattle (USA) in 2002.

	 She was the only woman camera director on a crew of directors on Channel 4(UK)’s award-winning series, ‘The Greatest Show on Earth - The Kumbh Mela’ (2001). She won the Royal Television Society Craft Award for it.

	 Her documentary feature on the Kumbh Mela- ‘In Search of Salvation’ for the German Telecast Footprint (Austria/Switzerland/Germany) fetched her award for Excellence in Film Making at the Damah Film Festival at Seattle, USA in 2001. It was nominated at the Commonwealth Film Festival (Manchester, U.K.) in 2002.


