
#Article: Barbara Bestor
#Type: regular article

Barbara Bestor is an American architect based in Los Angeles, California. She is the principal of Bestor Architecture, founded in 1992. Examples of her work include the Beats Electronics Headquarters in Culver City, the Nasty Gal Headquarters in downtown Los Angeles, Intelligentsia Coffee & Tea in Los Angeles, and the Toro Canyon House in Santa Barbara.  She teaches architecture at Woodbury University in Burbank, California. In 2015 she married director Tom Stern.

Biography

Early life

Barbara Bestor grew up in Cambridge, Massachusetts, where her father was an anthropologist and her mother was a college administrator. She interned for Cambridge Seven Associates through college, with a study-abroad year at the Architectural Association School of Architecture in London, eventually graduating from Harvard University in 1987. She then received a Master's degree in Architecture from the Southern California Institute of Architecture in Los Angeles in 1992.

Career

She began her architectural practice in Los Angeles in 1992. In her early career, she renovated many private residences in the Los Angeles area. She also designed the Actors' Gang theater in Hollywood with fellow architect Norman Millar. In 2001, she taught architecture at the Harvard Graduate School of Design. She returned to Los Angeles a year later, in 2002. She has taught architecture at the University of California, Los Angeles.

She teaches at the Woodbury University School of Architecture in Burbank, California, where is the executive director of the Julius Shulman Institute. She was the founding Chair of the Graduate program. In 2014, with Catherine Gudis, Thomas Kracauer, and Shannon Starkey, she curated an exhibition about the environmental graphic designer Deborah Sussman at Woodbury. She has been a TEDx speaker.

She has designed private residences in Echo Park, Pacific Palisades, Mount Washington, Silverlake, Los Feliz, Topanga Canyon, and Santa Barbara. She has also designed stores and restaurants in Los Angeles, New York City, and Tokyo. In 2011, she was the recipient of the LA Restaurant Design Award from the American Institute of Architects for her design of the Pitfire Pizza in LA. She was also nominated for the James Beard Foundation Award for the same restaurant that year. The Floating Bungalow house in Venice, CA was featured in MOCA’s 2013 survey of contemporary Los Angeles architecture. In 2015, the Beats By Dre Headquarters was recognized with a National AIA Honor Award for Interior Architecture.

Personal life

She is married to Tom Stern (director) and has two daughters from a previous marriage. 


