
#Article: Efrem Harkham
#Type: regular article

Efrem Harkham is an American hotelier and philanthropist from Beverly Hills, California. He is the Founder and CEO of LeHotels.com, a company representing 200 hotels globally, and LuxeHotels.com, an entity consisting of three luxury hotels based in Beverly Hills, California. 

Early life

Efrem Harkham was born in an Orthodox Jewish family in Israel. His maternal ancestors are keepers of Ezra's Tomb in Iraq. However, he grew up in Australia. He studied Law at university. He has a brother, Uri Harkham, the former President and Chief Executive Officer of Harkham Industries, a women's clothing company, Chairman Emeritus of Harkham Properties, and a Director of Public Storage.

Career

Harkham started his career in the fashion industry. He served as the Chief Executive Officer of Harkham Industries, representing the Jonathan Martin and Hype brands.He moved to Los Angeles in 1978. Five years later, in 1983, he purchased the Bel-Air Summit Hotel, now known as the Luxe Sunset Boulevard Hotel, located in Bel Air. A decade later, in 1993, he purchased the Luxe Rodeo Drive Hotel, located on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills. He subsequently added a third hotel to his portfolio, known as the Luxe City Center Hotel, located in Downtown Los Angeles. The three hotels comprise the Luxe Hotels brand.

He founded Luxe Worldwide Hotels in 1998. He serves as its President and Chief Executive Officer. The company provides marketing, sales and reservation services to 200 hotels globally, with a workforce of 315 employees.

He serves on the Board of Directors of the Jewish Television Network.

Philanthropy

In 1991, with his brother Uri, he donated $1 million to the Harkham Hillel Hebrew Academy. With his ex-wife, he also donated to the 2008 renovation of the Shalhevet High School, a co-education Orthodox Jewish school in Los Angeles. Additionally, he has donated to the Orthodox Union and Chabad.

He organizes the annual Apple Ball for the Beverly Hills Education Foundation.

Personal life

He is a naturalized American citizen. He was married to Kendra Harkham; they divorced in 2011. He resides in Beverly Hills, California.


