
#Article: Arvinder Singh Lovely
#Type: regular article

Arvinder Singh Lovely (born 1968) is an Indian politician, who was the Minister for Education, Tourism, Languages,Urban Development, Revenue, Transport Gurudwara election & Gurudwara Administration in the cabinet of the elected Indian National Congress (INC) Government which was headed by Sheila Dikshit.

Early life and education

Arvinder Singh Lovely was born in Ranjit Garh, Punjab, to Balvinder Singh. He pursued his graduation from SGTB Khalsa College, University of Delhi in Political Science.  He was elected to the Students' Union of the college. 

Political Career

He was also elected as the General Secretary, Delhi Pradesh Youth Congress in the year 1990, followed by the General Secretary of the National Student Union of India during 1992-1996.  He was elected to the Delhi Legislative Assembly for the first time in 1998, where he was the youngest MLA. Subsequently in 2000, he was appointed General Secretary, Delhi Pradesh Congress Committee (DPCC) and President, East District Congress Committee (I). He was made a Minister in the cabinet in 2003. He was the Education, Tourism, Languages, Gurudwara Administration, in the Council of Ministers, Govt. of Delhi.

He has never lost an election since he was elected for the first time in 1998.   He won again in Delhi Legislative Assembly election, 2013 consecutively for the fourth time from Gandhi Nagar constituency.

Controversies

Media reports indicated his involvement in a sex scandal during the Gujarat Assembly Elections 2002 when he was sent to Gujarat as Observer of Congress Party along with many other congress MLA's.A Cobrapost investigation in Dec 2014 revealed how politicians have been using chartered aircraft, with some of them flouting Election Commission norms. On 26th January 2014, Arvinder Singh Lovely took a chartered flight from Jaipur to Delhi. Strangely, Mr Lovely was with BJP leader Sudhanshu Mittal and then Congress MLA Haroon Yusuf, less than a month before Aam Aadmi Party chief Arvind Kejriwal stepped down as Delhi’s chief minister on February 14, 2014.He is also believed to be involved in Transport scam of giving away contracts to his known associates including Ponty Chaddha to run Cluster Buses in Delhi.


