
#Article: Syed Kamall
#Type: regular article

Dr Syed Salah Kamall MEP (born 15 February 1967) is a British academic and Conservative Party politician.

Kamall was elected a Member of the European Parliament representing London in 2005, and since 2013 has been Leader of the Conservatives in the European Parliament. In June 2014, he became Chairman of the European Conservatives and Reformists in the European Parliament.

Biography

Kamall was born and brought up in London. He is of Indo-Guyanese descent; his father migrated to London from Guyana in the 1950s to start a new life.He was educated at The Latymer School in Edmonton and holds a BEng from the University of Liverpool, a MSc degree from the London School of Economics and a PhD from City University London. 

Initial career

Kamall started his career as a business systems analyst for NatWest Bank Overseas Department (1989-91). He was a Management Fellow, University of Bath School of Management (1994-96), Management Research Fellow, Leeds University Business School (1996-97), Associate Director/Consultant, Omega Partners (1997-2001), and a Consultant at SSK Consulting (2001-05). Since 2004 he has been a Visiting Fellow at Leeds University Business School where he has lectured MBA students on international business and strategy, and supervised doctoral students' research.

Before entering the European Parliament, Kamall worked as a consultant to companies on marketing, strategy and public affairs. In 2003, he started a diversity recruitment business. He is a co-founder of the Global Business Research Institute (GBRI), an educational body conducting outreach to business executives, journalists and civil servants, promoting a greater understanding of globalisation and its consequences.

Publications

In 1996, Kamall wrote a book on EU telecommunications policy, and has written on multinational business and telecommunications policy for such books as "Management in China: The Experience of Foreign Businesses"; "Trade and Investment in China: The European Experience"; "Political and Economic Relations Between Asia and Europe: New Challenges in Economics and Management", and in such journals as Management International Review and Transnational Corporations.

Political career

Kamall has been a member of the Conservatives since 1987 and has held various positions in the party since then: Chairman, Stockwell Ward, Vauxhall Conservative Association; Hon. Secretary, Bath Conservative Association CPC; Chairman, Eccleston Ward, and Chairman, Eccleston/Churchill CPC, Cities of London and Westminster Conservative Association; Executive Member, London Eastern Area Committee.

In May 2000, Kamall was a Conservative Candidate for the London Assembly. The following year, he was Conservative candidate for West Ham in the June 2001 General Election. He was placed fourth on the Conservative list in London for the 2004 European Parliament elections. The Conservatives won three seats and Kamall became a Member of the European Parliament in May 2005, after Theresa Villiers stepped down on being elected as an MP to the UK Parliament. In the European Parliament, he is a member of the Economic and Monetary Affairs, Legal Affairs and International Trade committees.

Kamall was placed on the 'A-list' of Conservative parliamentary candidates ahead of the 2010 election and was again returned to Brussels in 2014 representing London as an MEP. 

See also

	 Members of the European Parliament for the United Kingdom 2004-2009

	 Members of the European Parliament for the United Kingdom 2009-2014


