
#Article: Tim Farmer
#Type: regular article

Timothy "Tim" Farmer (born March 18, 1964) is an American outdoorsman, musician, and television presenter. He is known as the host and executive producer of the television shows Kentucky Afield, Tim Farmer's Country Kitchen, and Tim Farmer's Homemade Jam., for which he has won a total of five regional Emmy awards.  A motorcycle accident in 1984 left Farmer without the use of this right arm, and he has since worked with other Kentuckians to cope with and overcome similar physical disabilities 

Early life

Farmer grew up in Mason County and Carter County, Kentucky.  He is the son of Jerry and Sherry Farmer, and has one older sister, Deborah, and one younger brother, Jonathon.  After graduating high school, Tim enlisted in the United States Marine Corps and completed boot camp. He was honorably discharged following a 1984 motorcycle accident that left him unable to use his right arm.

Television career

Kentucky Afield

Farmer is the host and executive producer of Kentucky Afield, produced by the Kentucky Department of Fish & Wildlife Resources. Farmer has hosted Kentucky Afield since 1995, following previous host Dave Shuffett.  Kentucky Afield is the longest continuously-running outdoor TV show in the United States, beginning broadcasts in 1953.  On the show, Farmer has overcome the physical limitations caused by his right arm's paralysis. Most notably, he has learned to shoot a bow and arrow by drawing the bow with his teeth. Farmer is also known for his sign-off, saying "I hope to see you in the woods or on the water."

Awards

	 1996 KAGC Communicator of the Year

	 2008 Ohio Valley Regional Emmy Award Recipient for best program host/moderator/narrator

	 2014 Ohio Valley Regional Emmy Award Recipient for best program host/moderator/narrator

Tim Farmer's Country Kitchen

Beginning production in 2012, Tim Farmer's Country Kitchen highlights country recipes and Kentucky restaurants.

Tim Farmer's Homemade Jam

Produced since 2013, Tim Farmer's Homemade Jam showcases Kentucky musicians. Guests of the show have included J. D. Crowe and Carl Hurley.


