
#Article: Andy García
#Type: regular article

Andrés Arturo García Menéndez (born April 12, 1956), professionally known as Andy García, is a Cuban-American actor and director. He became known in the late 1980s and 1990s, having appeared in several successful Hollywood films, including The Godfather Part III, The Untouchables, Internal Affairs and When a Man Loves a Woman. More recently, he has starred in Ocean's Eleven and its sequels, Ocean's Twelve and Ocean's Thirteen, and The Lost City.

García was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his role as Vincent Mancini in The Godfather Part III.

==Early life== García was born Andrés Arturo García Menéndez in Havana, Cuba. His mother, Amelie Menéndez, was an English teacher, and his father, René García Núñez, was an avocado farmer and attorney in Cuba, and later owned a fragrance business in the United States. García has two older siblings, a sister named Tessi and a brother named René. When García was five years old, the family moved to Miami, Florida, after the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion. Over a period of several years, they built up a million-dollar perfume company. García was raised as a Roman Catholic and attended Miami Beach Senior High School, where he played on the basketball team. During his last year in high school, he became ill with mononucleosis, which convinced him to pursue a career in acting. He began his acting career taking a drama class with Jay W. Jensen in his senior year at Miami Beach Senior High School. He graduated from Florida International University in Miami.

Career

García began acting at Florida International University but soon went to Hollywood. He had a short role in the first episode of "Murder, She Wrote" as "1st white tough" in 1984. He played the role of a gang member in the first episode of the popular TV series Hill Street Blues. He appeared in a supporting role in 1985's The Mean Season alongside Kurt Russell. Director Brian De Palma engaged him for The Untouchables (1987).

In 1989, García did the Ridley Scott film Black Rain with Michael Douglas. Also in 1989, Francis Ford Coppola was casting The Godfather Part III. García won the part of Vincent Mancini, the illegitimate son of Sonny Corleone, and earned an Academy Award nomination as Best Supporting Actor for his performance.

In the 1990s, García appeared in Internal Affairs, in which he engages in a battle of wits with a corrupt fellow police officer, played by Richard Gere. He played a conflicted good samaritan in Hero (1992), the enabling husband of an alcoholic in When a Man Loves a Woman (1994), a doomed criminal in Things to Do in Denver When You're Dead (1995), a crusading lawyer in the drama Night Falls on Manhattan (1997), and a cop trying to save his gravely ill son in the action thriller Desperate Measures (1998).

He portrayed the ruthless Las Vegas casino owner Terry Benedict in 2001's Ocean's Eleven, a remake of the 1960 Rat Pack caper movie. He also appeared in the sequel, Ocean's Twelve (2004), and in the final film, Ocean's Thirteen (2007).

In 2005, he released The Lost City, which he co-wrote, directed, and starred in, alongside Dustin Hoffman and Bill Murray.

In 2006, he appeared in the last episode of the Turkish TV series Kurtlar Vadisi, along with Sharon Stone.

Hemingway project

García is slated to direct the upcoming film Hemingway & Fuentes about famous writer Ernest Hemingway co-written by García and Hemingway's niece Hilary Hemingway. Originally, announced stars included Anthony Hopkins, Annette Bening and García himself. Filming was originally to have begun in January 2013, but due to delays, Hopkins left the project and Garcia announced that the role of Hemingway would be played by actor Jon Voight.

Personal life

In 1982, García married Marivi Lorido. García and his wife have four children: daughters Dominik García-Lorido (b. 1983), an actress, Daniella (b. 1988), and Alessandra (b. 1991); and son Andres (b. 2002). He is a Republican.

Filmography

Film

Television

Other awards and nominations

ALMA Awards

	2001: Nominated, "Outstanding Host of a Variety or Awards Special" - 1st Annual Latin Grammy Awards (shared w/Gloria Estefan, Jennifer Lopez & Jimmy Smits)

	2006: Won, "Anthony Quinn Award for Achievement in Motion Pictures"

Nostros Golden Eagle Awards

	1997: Won, "Outstanding Performer in Film"

See also

	List of people from Miami


