
#Article: Maxim Kuzyuk
#Type: regular article

Maxim Vadimovich Kuzyuk (link=no) (born on August 28, 1975) - General Director of the Open Joint Stock Company (OJSC) “Research, Development and Production Association “Izhmash”.

Biography

In 1998 Kuzyuk graduated Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology with honors, specializing in “Applied Physics and Mathematics”. From 1999 to 2003, he has been working in the “ArtTechCenter” Group of Companies, where was initially appointed as head of department, and later appointed head of one of the Group Companies.

From 2004 through 2006 has worked as the Head of Financial and Economic Department, General Director Deputy and Project Manager for “DrillTech Rus” Moscow, specializing in construction of pipelines using horizontal directional drilling technology.

In 2006, Kuzyuk continued his education by receiving his MBA degree from one of the world’s leading business schools- the International Institute for Management Development (IMD) in Switzerland. In 2007 Kuzyuk has accepted a proposal made by the Paris office of one of the world’s leading consulting corporations, Boston Consulting Group (BCG), and in 2010 Kuzyuk became the Director of the Moscow Office of BCG.

In February 2011 Kuzyuk has been appointed as the General Director Deputy of OJSC “SPC: Izhmash”, and later as General Director of the company.

The head of “Izhmash”

Maxim Kuzyuk has joined “Izhmash”, when the company was suffering rather hard times. The entire Group at that time was uniting about one hundred different companies, part of them were in the process of bankruptcy and in the middle of liquidation procedures. The majority of the remaining 32 group companies had complicated multilevel management structures, repetitive functions, and extremely high overhead costs (7% were paid as salaries to the top managers only). The groups total liability in the beginning of 2011 was about 19 billion Rubles. The Company was unable to pay salaries to its employees. Among other things, the problems included obsolete production facilities and the load level of modern equipment did not exceed 20%.

Being a head of one of the oldest defense enterprises in Russia, specializing in the production of various types of firearms (civil and military), M. V. Kuzyuk had an intricate challenge ahead of him - the reorganization and modernization, as well as the restoration of the enterprises financial health. Working with a team of anti-crisis managers, Mr. Kuzyuk developed two plans to get the company out of recession. After the plans were revised by the parent company - State Corporation “Rostekhnologii” - the bankruptcy and consolidation scenario was chosen, with an additional goal to maintain the scientific and productive potential of the enterprise, as well as keeping workplaces whilst making “Izhmash” a world leader in firearm production. At the same time the new and reformed company must be organized in a way that would alleviate it from its former problems so the company could become not only efficient, but profitable as well.

In accordance with the approved reorganization plan, a new legal entity OJSC “Research, Development and Production Association “Izhmash” was created. This new entity became a 100% subsidiary of the parental State Corporation “Rostekhnologii”. In the first quarter of 2012 previous contracts, production facilities and the most qualified and skilled personnel were transferred to the new structure of the company. The goal is to complete the formation of the property complex by the end of 2012.

To perform these ambitious tasks, the enterprise began to take measures aimed at overcoming the crisis. As the general Director of the Scientific Production Complex (SPC) “Izhmash” Mr. Kuzyuk has determined the following activities as high priority:

	 Production facilities modernization. In 2012 the Company plans to invest about 200 million Rubles of its own funds into its modernization. Part of this amount will be raised at the expense of credit and leasing operations, another part will be allocated from the Company’s profit. It is also expected that the Company will take part in other Federal Programs, such as those that promote the development of new technologies.

	 Financial Recovery. In this respect the leadership of “SPC “Izhmash” managed to establish control over the financial flows. As a result, no major funding from the government managed to keep the industrial base, valuable scientific staff and a global brand. Already on the previous year the company was able to earn, pay all the arrears of wages. The company is expecting to settle with its external creditors by 2015. In 2012, the company's profits should reach 5.3 billion rubles.

	 Increased production load. In 2011, the company managed to raise the level of high-performance multi-load equipment from 20% to 70%, and a more compact fit of the production facilities. Thus it was possible to release 30 thousand square meters of production property. The total effect of the improvements in the production efficiency reached 100 million rubles. In addition to that in 2011 the company has also managed a 50% increase in shipments to the U.S. market, constituting 65% of the total world market of sporting and hunting weapons. Revenues from this direction alone have reached a record 444.2 million rubles. Today, the "Izhmash" products are available in 27 countries including USA, Canada, Australia, Germany, Great Britain, Norway, Kazakhstan, Thailand and South Africa. The efforts made by the Company to enhance its market share and sales coverage have resulted in a 40% growth of revenues compared to 2010. Thanks to the measures, the output per worker increased from 616 thousand rubles up to 1,08 million rubles.

	 Improvement of old weapons and the development of new models to meet market requirements. Subject to the requirements of consumers and customer complaints about the existing products, the company developed the new AK-12 assault rifle, which will serve as the basis for a range of various new products for military and civil purposes. Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Defense have already shown great interest in this machine. By seriously improving the assault rifle’s ergonomic features, by improving the quality of barrel processing using foreign equipment, implementing plastics in the production, “Izhmash” plans to make the AK-12 into a universal platform, which can be used for the production of both common assault rifles for widespread use, and sophisticated systems, specially attuned to meet the specific needs of special forces. In addition, a new tactical sniper rifle was developed to replace the SV-98. In the class of semi-automatic sniper rifles, the company plans to release a new Dragunov rifle, which will have the best characteristics in its class by 2013, and to put it into service by 2014.

	 Job creation and the involvement of young professionals. The company aims to expand its markets, and by doing so, to preserve and provide the production staff as many workplaces as possible, even with the inclusion of production automation. One of the plans to achieve this is to transfer "vacated" staff to other areas, such as arms production, which has huge potential. In order to attract young professionals, the company has developed a program of student interaction with the Izhevsk State Technical University - the main supplier of engineering personnel for "Izhmash". Talented graduates are offered jobs in the company to cover the deficit of highly skilled and professional designers, who are needed due to the large amount of projects of new weapon development. Understanding the possible shortfall of engineers in the future, the company is laying the groundwork right now by hiring college seniors for part-time employment as well, so that they could be drawn into the process quicker and more efficiently.


