
#Article: Simon Baker
#Type: regular article

Simon Baker (born 30 July 1969) is an Australian actor and director. In his television acting career, he is best known for his lead role in the CBS television series The Mentalist as Patrick Jane and as Nicholas Fallin in The Guardian.

In his film acting career, he is best known for leading the roles in some of the highest grossing movies such as Max Rourke in the remake of the Japanese horror film The Ring Two, Riley Denbo in Land of the Dead and Christian Thompson in the film adaptation of The Devil Wears Prada, based on the 2003 novel of the same name.

Early life

Baker was born on 30 July 1969 in Launceston, Tasmania, to a high school English teacher, Elizabeth Labberton, and a groundskeeper/mechanic, Barry Baker. And he was raised as Roman Catholic. His parents divorced while he was still young. His mother later married Tom Denny, a butcher. Simon Baker has an older sister, currently a doctor in Australia, two half-brothers and a half-sister. By 1972, the family had moved from Launceston to Ballina, New South Wales, where Baker's parents hoped to secure better paying jobs. He attended St. Francis Xavier Catholic Primary School in Ballina and Ballina High School, graduating in 1986. In school, he was known as Simon Baker-Denny.

Acting career

Baker began acting on Australian television during the late 1980s using the name "Simon Denny". He first appeared in music videos for Melissa Tkautz ("Read My Lips") and Australian dance outfit Euphoria ("Love You Right") in 1991 before appearing in the successful series E Street, Home and Away and Heartbreak High. As "Simon Baker Denny" he was a co-star of the David Croft/Jeremy Lloyd sitcom pilot, Which Way to the War, which was not developed into a series.

In 1995, he was in an episode of the Australian television (ABC TV) series Naked (episode title: Blindside Breakaway) in the role of a rugby player. His character was an easy going mummy's boy until he met a girl who challenged his safe existence. He called the role "physically demanding" due to the fact most of the extras were actual rugby players.  At the time he referred to this role as an important opportunity as well as being "the best job I've had in my life". He went on to say it was going to be hard afterwards to want to do anything offered.

He relocated to the United States, where he was cast in a small role in L.A. Confidential, which led to further opportunities in supporting roles in films. In 1998 he starred in a small, independent film by filmmaker Stephen Grynberg titled "Love from Ground Zero", and in 1999 appeared in Ang Lee's Ride with the Devil. In 2000, he played Michael Scott in Adam Collis's Sunset Strip. He also played an astronaut in Red Planet with Val Kilmer, Carrie-Anne Moss and Benjamin Bratt. He played the male lead in the television series The Guardian for three seasons beginning in 2001, and also appeared in The Affair of the Necklace. He played a distressed husband in 2004's Book of Love. In 2005, he starred as an altruistic hero in George A. Romero's Land of the Dead.

In 2006, he played Brian Kelly in the film Something New, writer Christian Thompson in The Devil Wears Prada, and had a leading role as Jeff in the short-lived television series Smith. After Smith, he returned to movies and played the role of Roderick Blank in  Sex and Death 101 and Jack Bishop in Not Forgotten.

In 2008, Baker received the lead role of Patrick Jane, a consultant to the California Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in CBS's The Mentalist. In 2009, Baker was nominated for an Emmy Award for The Mentalist. In late 2009, Baker was also nominated for his second Golden Globe Award (for The Mentalist) and his first SAG Award for his work.

Baker has continued to act in movies during The Mentalist. He played Howard Hendricks in The Killer Inside Me, Jared Cohen in Margin Call, and Guy Harrap in I Give It a Year.

Directing career

Baker made his directorial debut with the second season episode of The Guardian, "My Aim Is True". On The Mentalist he has directed an episode per season from the third season onwards. The episodes he has directed include "Red Moon" (season 3), "Blinking Red Light" (season 4), "Red Sails at Sunset" (season 5), "My Blue Heaven" (season 6), and "The Silver Briefcase" (season 7).

Baker plans to produce and direct a movie based on the novel Breath by Tim Winton.

Other activities

On 6 June 2010, he played in a charity football match for The Rest of The World team versus England on ITV's Soccer Aid 2010, coming on as a substitute in the second half. The match went to a penalty shootout; Baker took a penalty which was saved by England celebrity goalkeeper, Jamie Theakston. The Rest of the World went on to win the shoot out and the match for the first time since the tournament started.

He is snappytoes on instagram.

Personal life

In 1998, Baker married Australian actress Rebecca Rigg after five years of living together. They have three children: Stella Breeze (born 8 August 1993), Claude Blue (born 1998), and Harry Friday (born 19 September 2001). Fellow Australian actress Nicole Kidman, is godmother to Harry while actress Naomi Watts is godmother to Claude. Baker and his family resided in Malibu, California, before moving back to Sydney; they then returned to Los Angeles so Simon could appear on Smith, and later on The Mentalist. He also owns property in Australia, near Byron Bay.

Baker and his sons are fans of the Parramatta Eels in the Australian NRL. His name first appeared in Who's Who in Australia in 2011. In July 2009, Baker told PopMatters that he is an agnostic.

In 2010, he was earning US$350,000 per episode of The Mentalist. At that time his net worth was US$25 million. Shortly after, he signed a contract that delivered a payment of US$30 million for his role as Patrick Jane.

Honors

On 14 February 2013, Baker was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions to the entertainment industry. Baker's star can be found at 6352 Hollywood Blvd.

In June 2012 was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences along with 175 other individuals.

Commercials

Baker was selected by the French perfume house Givenchy to be the face of the Fragrance "Gentlemen Only". In it Baker walks down a pavement in pouring rain, whilst carrying an umbrella. The spot released 11 March 2013 also exists in a 33 sec version and reached a strong YouTube audience.

Baker also featured in an 18-month ad campaign for ANZ Bank in Australia and New Zealand starting in 2012.

Since 2012, he has been a Longines Ambassador of Elegance  and featured in "Elegance is an attitude" advertising campaign which was shot in Chantilly Racecourse  as well as their magazine print campaign for the same slogan  shot by Le Studio Production SA.

Baker fronted Samsung Electronics Australia's "Turn on Tomorrow" campaign featuring as announced in July 2010 

He starred in a TV advertisement for Samsung Electronics Australia created by Leo Burnett Sydney which brings together all of Samsung's products in one 60-second TV spot.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations


