
#Article: Merrill Osmond
#Type: regular article

Merrill Davis Osmond (born April 30, 1953) is the lead singer and bassist of the 1970s pop-rock music group The Osmonds and its 1980s country music spinoff, The Osmond Brothers. He continues to perform with his brothers and also without them as a solo act. He is releasing a new album, 'A Tribute to Classic Rock', and tours worldwide.

Life and career

Osmond was born in Ogden, Utah, the fifth of the nine children of Olive May (née Davis) and George Virl Osmond. Four of the Osmonds were cast over a seven-year period on NBC's The Andy Williams Show, a musical variety program. They also appeared in nine episodes of the 1963-1964 ABC western television series, The Travels of Jaimie McPheeters, with Merrill in the role of young Deuteronomy Kissel. The series starred then 12-year-old Kurt Russell on a wagon train headed to the American West.

A tenor/countertenor vocalist well into adulthood, Merrill was either lead singer or co-lead singer (usually sharing duties with younger brother Donny) on almost all of the Osmonds' songs. When Donny began to focus on his own career in the late 1970s, Merrill grew out his beard and, along with his brothers, shifted to country music, recording a number of hits on the country charts in the 1980s; he also has at least one "solo" hit independent of his fellow Osmonds, a duet with session singer Jessica Boucher, "You're Here to Remember (I'm Here to Forget)," which was a major hit for him in 1987.

Merrill is the first of the performing siblings to marry. He wed Mary Carlson on September 17, 1973; they have four sons, two daughters, and 12 grandchildren. Merrill's second son, Justin Osmond, is deaf, as are their uncles, Virl and Tom Osmond, Merrill's two oldest brothers. Justin Osmond works with several organizations and launched the Olive Osmond Perpetual Hearing Fund in 2010.

Like the rest of his family, Merrill is a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In keeping with church tradition, all of his sons have served as missionaries.


