
#Article: McKey Sullivan
#Type: regular article

Brittany "McKey" Sullivan (born September 9, 1988) is an American fashion model most notable as the winner of the eleventh cycle of America's Next Top Model.

Early life

Sullivan was born to Michael and Gayle Sullivan and has three siblings, Bridgette, Jimmy, and Mikey. She is a graduate of Lake Forest High School and attended Ripon College where she majored in government and chemical biology  and was a member of Alpha Delta Pi sorority. She has come back to Ripon College again to start her life as a student to pursue her degree. She also trains in mixed martial arts with her husband, Sam Alvey. She was known for appearing at the Bristol Renaissance Faire, which inspired her medieval fashion sense. Sullivan got into modeling when she tried out for Elite Model Look following a sports injury and won the regional division of the competition.

America's Next Top Model

Sullivan competed in Cycle 11 against thirteen other contestants, ultimately winning the competition.

Two other contestants named Brittany (or some variation) also competed in Cycle 11, so Sullivan and Brittney Brown were asked by Tyra Banks to change their names for the show. Sullivan chose 'McKey' since her mother was considering naming her McKenzie when she was born and since it was her penname in high school. She plans on continuing to use the name beyond this television season. She came into the competition with shoulder-length bright red hair but was later given makeover to short black hair.

Throughout the competition, she became one of the front-runners with two collective first call-outs and never placed below fifth. During her go-see challenge in Amsterdam, she was booked by all of the four designers that she met, despite being disqualified from the challenge when she returned to the agency outside of the time limit. She went on to beat Samantha Potter for the title. She became the second winner to never have a bottom two appearance, with Jaslene Gonzalez being the first. This record was succeeded by Nicole Fox, Krista White, Sophie Sumner, and Jourdan Miller.

As part of the ANTM prize package awarded to her, Sullivan appeared on the cover of Seventeen Magazine with a 6-page editorial and received a contract with CoverGirl cosmetics and a contract for representation with Elite Model Management. She will be featured in Wal-Mart campaign, as well as in the national CoverGirl campaign ads. Her win also comprises a billboard in Times Square.

Career

Print/online work

Sullivan was featured in the December 2008 issue of In Touch Weekly. She appeared on the cover and had a spread in the February 2009 issue of Seventeen magazine as part of her ANTM prize package. She also has been on the cover of Forest & Bluff Magazine, January 2009 issue and Nylon Magazine, March 2009. She has recently been featured on Yahoo Style with Whitney Thompson. She had the cover and a spread in Chicago Scene, June 2009 as well as various advertisements for Forever 21, Rendezvous, Myer, Crabtree and Evelyn and Sass and Bide. She also appeared on the September 2009 issue of Marie Claire modelling Oroton, Fendi and Miu Miu handbags and purses. Sullivan was featured on the Cover Fall 2009 cover and interior fashion spread of Vogue knitting magazine.

Runway

She has walked for EиD by Eva and Delia, Mada van Gaans, Ready to Fish by Ilja Visser and Addy van den Krommenacker at Amsterdam International Fashion Week 2009, bookings she was hired for during the go-sees of episode 10. McKey also walked for G-Star at Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week Fall 2009. She has walked in Trinidad and Tobago Fashion Week 2009 for Heather Jones Designs Limited. She also appeared in Dutch Avantgarde with Samantha Potter. She also appeared on the runway for Mr. Jay's clothing line called "attitude" with Aminat.

Personal life

In 2005, Sullivan met her husband, Sam Alvey, a mixed martial artist, at the Bristol Renaissance faire where he was working. On August 7, 2011, after 4 years of dating, Sam proposed to Sullivan. They married January 19, 2012 at the Wilderness Hotel in Wisconsin Dells, WI. Sullivan announced they are expecting their first child on April 2, 2013 in an interview, after 7 months of the pregnancy. They have a daughter, Reagan Quincy Alvey born in July 2013, and a son Ival born in October 2014.

Other

During her My Life as a CoverGirl commercials, it was revealed that she had been working with the Make-A-Wish Foundation. She was also named one of People magazine's Most Beautiful People of 2009.

She was also named the 44th sexiest woman of 2008 by BuddyTv.


