
#Article: Margaret E. Ward
#Type: regular article

Margaret E. Ward is a well-known entrepreneur, journalist and broadcaster based in Dublin, Ireland. She has worked in The Irish Times, Sunday Times and as a presenter on Newstalk radio Shes currently CEO of Clear Ink and Broadly Speaking. Margaret is also an international radio and TV commentator appearing on several Irish, British and American TV and radio stations including RTE, TV3, BBC and NPR (US). Shes also a popular conference chair around Europe and sits on several boards.In 2014 Margaret E. Ward was nominated for a position on the RTÉ Board of directors she will take up her position on the 15th February 2015. She also serves on the board of European Movement Ireland and was previously on the committees of Women on Air and the Business Journalists Association of Ireland.

Early and Personal Life

Margaret E. Ward is a native of New York, with Irish parents. She moved to Dublin in 1995 where she still lives in Dublin with her husband and two children.

Entrepreneur

Margaret E. Ward is the founder and managing director of Clear Ink a brand communications agency based in Dublin, Ireland. Margaret is also the founder of the public speaking training company Broadly Speaking (2012). In 2010, Margaret also founded a seminar and networking group in Ireland called Women on Air to give women the skills and confidence to express their expert opinions on radio and TV. In 2014, Margaret was shortlisted for the Image businesswoman of the year awards 2014 and for the Women Mean Business awards

Journalist

Margaret has over 25 years of experience working as a journalist. She started writing professionally while still in university and her first front page story appeared in Gannett Newspapers (New York) in 1990. Margaret started her career in Irish journalism at the Irish Times in 1996. She worked there as an investigative journalist, personal finance columnist and news reporter. In 2000, she joined the Sunday Times to head up their first Money section in Ireland and she remained with them until 2005. She returned to The Irish Times and wrote two business columns Cents and Nonsense and Platform. Margaret also worked as the breakfast business presenter on Newstalk radio during Ireland's bailout period on weekday mornings between 2010 and 2011. She writes occasional editorials for Independent Newspapers on diversity and business. Margaret is an Irish TV and radio personality - including tonight with Vincent Browne, Tubridy on 2FM, The History Show, RTE Radio 1 Saturday View, TV3, BBC and National Public Radio (USA) NPR. Margaret has been awarded the Law Society of Ireland’s Justice Media award for social and campaigning journalism and the ICL Science & Technology journalism award.


