
#Article: Wendy McCarthy
#Type: regular article

Wendy Elizabeth McCarthy, , (born 22 July 1941 in , New South Wales) is an Australian businesswoman, activist and former university administrator.

Biography

McCarthy began her career as a secondary school teacher. Her first experience as a political lobbyist came about when, newly pregnant, she and her husband joined the Childbirth Education Association, campaigning for (amongst other things) the rights of fathers to be present at the births of their babies. Since then, she has worked with government, corporations and community-based organisations in education, women’s issues, public health, heritage, media and waste management and she has held national leadership roles in all of these areas. She has represented Australia at conferences on women’s health and leadership, education, broadcasting, conservation and heritage and for four years was Chair of the Advisory Committee of WHO Kobe Centre, Japan.

In 1972 she was a co-founder of the Women's Electoral Lobby. Her senior executive and non-executive positions are extensive and have included: CEO - Family Planning Association of Australia (1979-84); Member - National Women's Advisory Council (1978-81); Member - Sydney Symphony Orchestra Council; Director - Australian Multicultural Foundation. She has held executive and non-executive director roles in many of Australia's leading private and public institutions including Executive Director, Australian Federation of Family Planning Associations; Deputy Chair of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) for eight years; General Manager of Marketing and Communications, the Australian Bicentennial Authority; Chair of the National Better Health Program; Executive Director of the National Trust; Director Star City; Chair of the Australian Heritage Commission; and Chair of Symphony Australia. In 2005 she completed ten years as Chancellor of the University of Canberra.

She currently chairs headspace - Australia's National Youth Mental Health Foundation, Circus Oz, McGrath Estate Agents and Pacific Friends of the Global Fund and is a non-executive director of Goodstart Childcare Limited and Bentham IMF. In 2009 after 13 years of service to Plan International, she retired from her most recent role as Global Vice Chair. She is Patron of the Australian Reproductive Health Alliance.

In 1989 she was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia for her contribution to community affairs, women's affairs and the Bicentennial celebrations. In 1996 she received an Honorary Doctorate from the University of South Australia. In April 2003 she was awarded the Centenary Medal.


