
#Article: Urum Kalu Eke
#Type: regular article

Elder Urum Kalu "UK" Eke, Mfr (born November 20, 1964) is an Executive Director with First Bank of Nigeria Limited. Before this, he had worked with Diamond Bank Plc. where he rose to become an Executive Director. He began his career in 1986 with Deloitte Haskins & Sells International, a firm of chartered accountants. Holder of the Nigerian national order of merit, Member of the Order of the Federal Republic (Mfr), UK, as he is more commonly known, is also a chartered accountant.

Early life

UK was born in Lagos. His father was a Scotland-trained nurse, who had to flee Lagos with his young family just before the breakout of the Nigerian Civil War in 1967. Along with his mother, a housewife, and six other siblings, UK traversed Eastern Nigeria in the Civil War years, accompanying a father whose profession was much sought after during the war. The third of his parents’ children, and first male child, UK attended Comprehensive Secondary School, Aba and Government College, Umuahia for his West African School Certificate (WASC) and Higher School Certificate (HSC) respectively. Thereafter he obtained a bachelor’s degree in Political Science from the University of Lagos in 1985, before completing an MBA in Projects Management Technology from Federal University of Technology, Owerri in 2008.

Career

Deloitte Haskins and Sells International

From 1985, UK spent his 1-year mandatory post-graduation service in the employment of Deloitte Haskins and Sells International. He worked for another 5 years with the company rising up to the post of Audit Senior/Consultant.

Diamond Bank

UK spent nineteen years with Diamond Bank. His increasingly senior roles in the bank included branch manager, Regional Manager, Divisional Head and Executive Director. He left Diamond Bank in April 2011.

First Bank

UK joined FirstBank as Executive Director, Public Sector South, in May 2011, with responsibility for all state and federal government relationships in addition to tertiary and health institutions in the south of Nigeria. Appointed FirstBank’s Chief Knowledge Officer in 2013, UK is currently the bank’s Executive Director South.

On Monday, September 7, 2015, First Bank of Nigeria Limited announced UK's appointment as Group Managing Director, FBN Holdings Plc. This appointment will take effect from January 1, 2016, when he will replace Mr. Bello Maccido, the pioneer Group CEO of FBN Holdings. 

Personal life

UK is married to Dr. (Mrs.) Uganze Eke, a trained pharmacist. The couple has four daughters. A Paul Harris Fellow of Rotary International, UK founded the Elder (Chief) K.U. Eke Memorial Foundation, through which he supports education scholarship, women empowerment, training of clergy men/pastors, mentoring and capacity building.


