
#Article: Trevor Burgess
#Type: regular article

Trevor Burgess is an American investment banker and CEO of C1 Financial. 

Early life and work prior to C1

Burgess has been openly gay since his teenage years. He graduated in 1994 from Dartmouth College. He was a management consultant at Monitor Company, a Cambridge, Massachusetts firm associated with Michael Porter. Burgess spent ten years at Morgan Stanley as an investment banker in New York, Los Angeles and London, including "executing more than $50 billion in transactions for major clients, including Chipotle Mexican Grill, which he helped take public in 2006." His last appointment was as a Managing Director in Global Capital Markets leading over 100 investment banking transactions such as the IPO for Chipotle. He then went on to be a partner at Artesia Capital Management, a private equity firm with investments in Brazil and the U.S."

Industry environment for LGBT workers

In 2012 the Human Rights Campaign noted it was still an issue to be LGBT in the workplace as there were no openly gay CEOs in the Fortune 1000 and "U.S. Companies can still legally fire a worker for being gay in 29 states, and many subtle biases remain in the workplace." Former BP chief John Browne noted that homophobic corporate cultures and board of directors keep people in the closet with corporations level of conservativeness rising with the company's size. Todd Sears, founder of an annual LGBT leadership summit for the finance industry noted it was common for executives to not come out until they retired, or even be outed when they died. The 'Wall Street journal' reported in March 2014 that it was still common for LGBT workers to stay closeted.

Personal life

He became the first openly gay CEO of a bank on the New York Stock Exchange when C1 Financial, which is based in St Petersburg, Florida, made a $44.7 million public offering in August 2014. In the company's initial public offering filing to the Securities and Exchange Commission he disclosed that his husband, Gary Hess, held some shares thus confirming his sexuality in the disclosure. Burgess and Hess have a daughter, Logan.

He has been featured in Bloomberg Businessweek's "Out on the Street" and in the book, "The G Quotient-Why Gay Executives are Excelling as Leaders." In 2013 he won Ernst & Young's Entrepreneur of the Year award in Florida’s financial services category.

See

	 U.S. Century Bank


