
#Article: Katya Sambuca
#Type: regular article

Katya Sambuca (born Yekaterina Mikhailova, August 27, 1991) is a Russian singer, actress, model and television presenter. She is married to the director of adult movies Bob Jack, and she is one of the characters of his novel Por-no!

Biography

Kate Sambuka was born in Saint-Petersburg. She went to the school No 216, which was special with the enhanced education of Polish language. After she had finished the school, Kate was attending a cooking college for a year. During her practice in the "Liverpool" restaurant she met Mick Jagger, the soloist of The Rolling Stones band. Mick even invited her to visit the USA. When Kate was 15, she became a prototype model for a child's toy: the "Bobby" doll was first time manufactured in London in her image.

Katya was given her nickname "Sambuca" by Bob Jack, the director of adult movies, whom she married at the age of 16. The couple got a daughter Zvana, named after the hotel in Volkhov, where Sambuca's future husband had grown into a man.

In 2011, Katya, together with her husband, left for a massive tour, during which she performed an erotic show accompanied by her own 'house' and 'trap' songs in more than 70 cities of Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Estonia, Poland, and Cyprus. Upon completion of the tour, Sambuca became one of the leading entertainers for "Yandex" top requests in both Russia and Ukraine. She was on the cover of magazines XXL (Ukraine) and Qoqo (Estonia, the successor to the Estonian edition of Playboy).

In 2013, she became the presenter of the program "Fashionable device" on the channel «2x2».

In August 2014, in the Estonian town of Haapsalu, Sambuca opened a rehabilitation center of women in crisis situations related to family problems and offered to help Mrs. Evelin Ilves, the wife of the President of Estonia, who was accused of treason by paparazzi with a stranger in one of Tallinn's cafe.

She has the Swedish and Estonian roots from her grandmother.

Trial with Philipp Plein

In the autumn of 2014, the German designer Philipp Plein released men's shirts costing $450 each with a picture of naked Katya Sambuca without her permission. In response, Katya threatened him with litigation.

Monument to the Mermaid in Haapsalu

In December 2014, the Moscow sculptor Alexander Wroblewski started to create a monument to the little mermaid with the face and forms of Katya Sambuca. Bronze statue 125 cm tall and weighing 175 kg will be installed on the boardwalk Chocolate Haapsalu the bench next to the memorial of Peter Tchaikovsky.

Filmography

Awards

	 «The most beautiful girl of VKontakte» (2011)

	 Girl of the year in the magazine XXL (2012, Ukraine)

	 Girl of the year in the magazine Playboy/Qoqo (2012, Estoni)

	 Gran Prix of the Barcelona Erotic Festival (FICEB/Klic-Klic, 2013, «The best world’s club show»)


