
#Article: Zelana Montminy
#Type: regular article

Zelana Montminy is a doctor of psychology, health expert, author and TV personality originally from San Diego, California. Montminy is best known for her work in positive psychology and in the media.

Life

Montminy was born in San Diego, California. Her mother Esfira Burd is a linguist and former journalist while her father Frank Muchnik is a commercial artist. Her parents and older sister Fianna Muchnik Jurdant, a senior policy analyst at the OECD, immigrated from the former Soviet Union to the USA in the 70s. Montminy studied at Pomona College, Cornell University, California School of Professional Psychology and Chicago School of Professional Psychology. She holds Master's and Doctorate degrees in clinical psychology with a specialization in health and focus in positive psychology, and has a certification in nutrition. Zelana married Joel Montminy investment banker in Los Angeles in 2007. They currently live in Los Angeles and have two children.

Career

Zelana Montminy docotor of psychology, a TV host, a nutrition and wellness expert, author, an entrepreneur, and a speaker. During her prolific career she has collaborated with health and fitness experts like Dr. Oz, Jane Fonda, Dr. Andrew Weil, Bob Harper, and created a series of three DVDs titled "Healthy, Fit, Happy Mom" related to pre and post pregnancy exercises and nutrition.

Doctor of Psychology

Montminy is a member of the American Psychological Association, a consultant for the Institute for Applied Positive Research, active in Conservation International, and serves on several boards, including the Pacific Region of the Young Presidents’ Organization (YPO) and the Program Advisory Board of the Respect Institute. She has contributed to the issues of the science of happiness, psychological influence on health, our relationship with food, and the link between emotions and healthful eating behavior.

Host and reporter

She has been a health and wellness reporter for “PopSugar Now!” on the TV Guide Network Channel, and hosted a variety of shows on different networks including “Fit or Fiction”, “What to Eat For…”, “Celebrity Secret Weapon”, “Class FitSugar”, “Get The Bod”.

Health and wellness expert

Montminy is a featured expert in a variety of national print and digital magazines such as People, Redbook, Everyday Health, Fit Pregnancy, Shape, Huffington Post, and Psychology Today. She also appeared as a guest expert in Good Morning America, The Today Show, E! Entertainment Television, People Magazine.


