
#Article: Aaron Feldman
#Type: regular article

Aaron Feldman is an American professional photographer, best known as the founder and CEO of True Photography Weddings,  the largest wedding photo business in San Diego, California.  He is also a celebrity photographer and has captured notable figures and celebrities, including former President George H. W. Bush, Opus Lang Lang, Drew Brees, and the LA Lakers. 

Early life and education

Feldman was born in San Diego, California to Ed and Laura Feldman.  He attended University City High School in San Diego and graduated in 1994. He holds a Bachelor of Fine Arts from the Brooks Institute of Photography.  His grandfather, Peter Grant was a LA Times photographer. 

Career

Feldman was trained in photography by his grandfather, Peter Grant, an LA Times AP photographer who photographed the Beatles on their first visit to the U.S. in 1964   and formally at Brooks Institute.  After graduating in 2000, he received an offer to assist for noted photographer Annie Leibovitz but turned down it in favor of starting his own company, Aaron Feldman Photography. After a brief period on his own, Feldman added four staff photographers, and continued expanding the company. By 2010, he had rebranded the wedding photography division to True Photography Weddings, which is now the largest independently-owned wedding photography studio in the country. His works have been published and featured in several magazines including ESPN Magazine, Exquisite Weddings, W Magazine, Martha Stewart Weddings, Ceremony, In Style and Modern Bride.  

As a celebrity photographer, Feldman has captured many notable figures, including President George H. W. Bush, Opus Lang Lang, Drew Brees, and the LA Lakers. 

Personal life

Feldman married April Louzek and together they have a son.  

Health issues

In December of 2014, Feldman was diagnosed with an extremely rare form of Leukemia and was recruited into an aggressive clinical trial at UCSD Medical Center. He is currently documenting his cancer treatment and sharing his story on his blog titled howibeatmycancer.com  On June 2, 2015, local event and wedding professionals threw a "Love Benefit" event in Feldman's honor, with over three hundred people in attendance. 

Publications

	ESPN Magazine 

	Wedding Chicks

	Exquisite Weddings (Front Cover and 21-Page Inside Spread)

	Ceremony Magazine (Front Cover D12, 2012)

	Ceremony Magazine (Front Cover, 2012) 

	Ceremony Magazine (Front Cover, 2011) 

	Ceremony Magazine (Front Cover, 2010) 

	San Diego Style Weddings (February Issue) 

	Beautiful Bride Magazine cover (Summer Issue, 2013) 

	The Knot - Real Wedding Featured 

	Style Me Pretty - La Jolla Wedding Featured 


