
#Article: Prem Lal Joshi
#Type: regular article

Dr. Prem Lal Joshi is a professor of Accounting and Chairman, Center for Excellence in Business Performance (CEBP) at the Multimedia University, Cyberjaya, Malaysia. He is the author of several books and founding and honorary Editor of International Journal of Accounting Auditing and Performance Evaluation (IJAAPE), founding Managing Editor of Afro Asian Journal of Finance and Accounting (AAJFA) and Associate Editor of International Journal of Finance and Accounting Studies, Australia.

His experience includes with the Multimedia University, Malaysia, University of Bahrain, Bahrain, Bilkent University, Turkey, University of Nairobi, Kenya, NITIE (Mumbai) and HN Bahuguna Garhwal University. In addition to his books, he has published more than 100 research papers in accredited international journals in accounting and interdisciplinary areas all over the world.

Early life and education

Joshi earned his Ph.D in Commerce (Finance and & Accounting) from Hemwati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, India in 1981 and Master's degree in Commerce from South Delhi Campus, University of Delhi in 1975. He was awarded a Teacher Fellowship by Indian Council of Social Science Research, New Delhi in 1979.

Academic career

In 2007, he was admitted as an Academic Fellow by Association of International Accountants, United Kingdom. He founded and worked as an Editor-in-Chief of two accredited international journals in Accounting namely, International Journal of Accounting , Auditing and Performance Evaluation (IJAAPE) and Afro Asian Journal of Finance and Accounting (AAJFA), published by leading international publishers from U.K., He is an Associate Editor of International Journal of Finance and Accounting Studies, Australia. He has published over 85 research papers in Accounting and interdisciplinary areas in refereed accredited international journals . His current citations are 627 (H index 14 dated 10th March 2015) as rated by Google Scholar. 

He has published the largest number of research papers in international journals in accounting than any professors in India. One of his papers on Management Accounting has been cited by international scholars for more than 167 times. Two of his books in accounting are text books in Government Schools in Bahrain. These books were written in consultation with Ministry of Education, Bahrain. 

He has presented research papers in more than 35 international conferences and chaired many technical sessions all over the world, particularly in European Accounting Association. While working at National Institute of Industrial Engineering (NIIE), Mumbai and at the University of Bahrain, over 100 training programmes and workshops for corporate executives and government officers in budgeting , cost management, accounting and finance. He was instrumental in designing and conducting three seminars on Zero-based Budgeting for the senior administrative officers of Maharashtra, Gujarat and Andoman Nicobar governments during 1986-87 as a part of their ZBB implementation strategies. He carried out outstanding work on ZBB during 90s. 

During his association with NITIE, Garhwal University, and University of Bahrain, he guided several Ph.D and M.Phil students apart from supervising a number of Postgraduate and MBA projects. He has acted as an external reviewer/referee for evaluating the credentials of faculty promotion and Ph.D theses for several international universities from South Africa, Australia, United Kingdom, Canada, Middle East, Malaysia, and India.

He has conducted many issued-based global and national surveys such as "Some Reflections on Non-Resident Indians' Proud Feelings Toward India: A Global Survey", "Value-based education among Indian Schools in GCC", "Value-based journalism", "Survey of positive and negative aspects of the Indian administrative bureaucratic system",  "India's Top-Ranking B-Schools Are at a Crossroads". 

As a team member, he delivered consultancy services to BATELCO, Bahrain; Baharain Institute of Music; EURO CAP, Nairobi; MP Laghu Udyog Nigam Ltd, Bhopal; Forbes & Forbes Co.; Maharashtra Electronics Ltd.; Mukund Iron & Steel Ltd., Mumbai. . During the 1980s, while working at Garhwal University, he also played a role in establishing Faculty of Commerce as it was a new university.

He taught in India, Kenya, Bahrain, Turkey and Malaysia Currently, he is a Professor of Accounting at Multimedia University (MMU), Malaysia.

He was a member of AAA’s IT Committee for 2005-06 and a VP of Indian audit asso. during 1991-92. He was also a member of European Accounting Association from 1995-2012. 

Achievements & awards

He has been honored with several awards namely Sardar Patel International Award, Hind Rattan Award, Rajiv Gandhi Excellence in Education award, Bharat Garav award, NRI Institute award for Excellence by various organizations for his outstanding contributions in education and research fields.

Publications

Books

	 Financial Accounting I & II (co-authors: Latifa and others), published by Ministry of Education, Kingdom of Bahrain, 2003 (the book was written in consultation with UNESCO team). 

	Techniques of Zero Based Budgeting: Text and Cases, Himalaya Publishing , 1988, Mumbai, India. 

	Zero Based Budgeting Technology in Government, Deep and Dhurv Publishers, 1986, New Delhi, India. 

	Leasing Comes of Age: Indian Scene, Amrita Publication, 1985, Mumbai, India. 

	Institutional Financing in India, Deep & Deep Publications, 1984, New Delhi, India.

	Introduction to Zero Based Budgeting, Deep & Deep Publishing, 1984, New Delhi, India.

See also

	 List of people from Uttarakhand

	 List of Indian writers


