
#Article: Lauren Iungerich
#Type: regular article

Lauren Emily Iungerich is a writer, director and showrunner known for Awkward.

Early life

Iungerich was born in Los Angeles, California to social worker mother, Viola Iungerich (née Dube), and attorney father, Russell Iungerich. She grew up in Rancho Palos Verdes, California and graduated from Palos Verdes Peninsula High School in 1992.Then, graduated from Claremont McKenna College in 1996. The Palos Verdes area was the setting of Awkward.

Career

At the end of her junior year of college Iungerich began interning for Hollywood producers. She worked as an assistant to producer Arnold Kopelson on U.S. Marshals and A Perfect Murder, and worked in production. She wrote scripts for TV show pilots and had a film script optioned by Icon Productions. She was hired to the writing staff of ABC Family's 10 Things I Hate About You based on her play Love on the Line.

She has created some web content, My Two Fans, which she describes as being inspired by Curb Your Enthusiasm.

Iungerich created the MTV sitcom Awkward. She left the show after season three. That year she won the People's Choice Award for "Favorite Cable Comedy".

Iungerich has an upcoming project called Couch Detective, an ABC hour long comedic mystery via Jerry Bruckheimer TV and Warner Bros. Television. Another upcoming project is called Tough Cookie, and is set up at ABC Family and will be a single camera comedy.

Filmography

	 2014: Damaged Goods (TV movie) - Executive Producer, Writer

	 2013: Awkward - Executive Producer (47 episodes); Writer (21 episodes); Director (11 episodes)

	 2013: Hot Mess (TV movie) - Executive Producer, Director, WRiter

	 2013: Dumb Girls (TV movie) - Executive Producer, Writer

	 2009: 10 Things I Hate About You - Writer (1 episode "Don't Give Up")

	 2009: My Two Fans (Web series) - Producer, Director, Writer

	 1998: A Perfect Murder - Producer's Assistant

	 1998: U.S. Marshals - Producer's Assistant

Personal life

Iungerich married music supervisor Jamie Dooner in 2012. They have a daughter named Charlie and live in Southern California.


