
#Article: Stephen Tibbo
#Type: regular article

Stephen Tibbo is an Emmy award winning Hollywood sound mixer, who has worked in American Pie 2, Kiss Kiss Bang Bang, in addition to television shows including Modern Family, Ghost Whisperer, and Life. In addition, Tibbo did "webisodes for the show Childrens Hospital, which won an Emmy". Since the early 90's, Stephen Tibbo has "worked in both production and post production" and in "2007 Stephen built his own stage to do ADR and to mix film and television projects".

Life and career

Stephen Tibbo, a native to California, is married and has two daughters, one of whom is interested in roller derby. Earlier in his life, Tibbo enjoyed playing golf, but when he started attending university, sound became his hobby, and eventually his career. In 1987, Tibbo started "in audio for film and television", serving as a boom operator, quickly working his way up to mixing. In 1989, Stephen Tibbo "mixed his first film and was hooked".

Today, Tibbo's main recorder is a Zaxcom Deva. The sound mixer stated that for shows with a plethora of spontaneity, such as Modern Family, using the MKH 8060 Sennheiser microphone is ideal, because it "is not only compact and lightweight, but it was designed to suppress off-axis sounds without coloration, making it ideal for boom camera mounting." Half of the year, Stephen Tibbo does post-production sound work, out of the studio at his residence.

Awards

	Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Sound Mixing - Modern Family, En Garde (2010)

	Nominated to Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Sound Mixing - Modern Family, Halloween (2011)

	Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Sound Mixing - Modern Family, Dude Ranch (2012)

	Nominated to Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Sound Mixing - Modern Family, My Hero (2013)

	Cinema Audio Society Award for Outstanding Achievement for TV Series, Half Hour - Modern Family, Disneyland (2013)

	Nominated to Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Sound Mixing - Modern Family, The Wedding: Part 1 (2014)

	Cinema Audio Society Award for Outstanding Achievement in Sound Mixing - Modern Family, Goodnight Gracie (2014)

	Cinema Audio Society Award for Outstanding Achievement in Sound Mixing -"Modern Family","Australia" (2015)


