
#Article: Thomas Hughes-Hallett
#Type: regular article

Sir Thomas Hughes-Hallett (born 1954) is a British barrister, investment banker and philanthropy executive. He serves as the Non Executive Chair of theMarshall Institute at London School of Economics and the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital NHS Foundation Trust. He promotes philanthropy within the City of London.

Early life

Thomas Michael Sydney Hughes-Hallett was born on 28 August 1954.

He was educated at Eton College, a private boarding school in Berkshire, England. He read History at the University of Oxford. He taught mathematics, music and hockey in Southern Rhodesia at the age of twenty-one. He then received a law degree from The College of Law.

Career

He worked as a barrister. He then worked as an investment banker for Schroders for five years. For the next eighteen years, he was the Chief Executive of Enskilda Corporate and later the Chairman of Robert Fleming Securities. A major shareholder in Flemings, he retired from finance shortly after its merger with Chase in 2000.

He was the Chairman of the Michael Palin Centre for Stammering Children and the English Churches Housing Group in the 1990s. From 2000 to 2012, he served as the Chairman of the Marie Curie Cancer Care. In 2002, he cycled across Vietnam to raise his £90,000 salary for the Marie Curie Cancer Care.

He served as the Executive Chair of the Institute of Global Health Innovation at Imperial College London. He also serves as the non-executive Chairman of Cause4. Additionally, he served as the Chairman of the End of Life Care Implementation Advisory Board and as Chair of the Palliative Care Funding Review. He is a member of the Board of Trustees of the Esmée Fairbairn Foundation 

He has called for more bankers and investors from the City of London to be involved in philanthropy and donate not only time and talent, but also money. He spoke at the Close Brothers Trustee Leadership Programme, a seminar organised by Close Brothers Asset Management, an investment firm based in the City of London. He argued that serving on the Board of Trustees of a philanthropic organisation was a valuable work experience to then serve on a corporate board.

He is the Chairman of the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital NHS Foundation Trust. He also serves on the Board of Trustees of the King's Fund. In 2013, he called for a reform of the National Health Service, with some treatments being charged. He wrote an op ed about it in The Daily Mail.

He was knighted by the Queen for his philanthropic work during her 2012 Birthday Honours. As a result, he is styled Sir Thomas Hughes-Hallett. He was the recipient of the Beacon Fellowship from the UK Community Foundations in 2013.

Personal life

He is married to Lady Jules Hughes-Hallett. She is the Chair of Smart Works a non-profit organisation which gives free clothes and job interview advice to women who are unemployed. The couple have three children, two of whom are sons. They lost a female infant, Emily. They reside in London and have another home in Suffolk.


