
#Article: Jill Kargman
#Type: regular article

Jill Kargman is an author, writer and actress based in New York City's Upper East Side. A common theme in her works is critical examination of the lives of wealthy women in her city. Her 2007 Momzillas was adapted into the Bravo television show Odd Mom Out, which premiered June 8, 2015.

Selected works

Kargman appears as a satirical version of herself in a Bravo scripted comedy television show called Odd Mom Out. The show is written by her and based on her novel Momzillas (Dutton, 2007).The show is based on Kargman's life and portrays the outrageous lifestyles of extremely wealthy mothers who live in the Upper East Side. In the book Kargman describes "momzillas" as mothers who are "negligent, domineering, competitive, preachy, and sad". Kirkus Reviews described Momzillas as "a decent effort that debunks the myth of the perfect mommy".

The Ex-Mrs. Hedgefund was published in April 2009. Kirkus Reviews described the book as "funny, but in the current economic context ill-timed" due to its 2009 publication during the Great Recession. A reviewer for the Chicago Tribune called the book "a hot summer read".

Pirates and Princesses was published in September 2011. Kargman wrote the book with her 8-year-old daughter Sadie; illustrations were provided by Christine Davenier. The book's target audience is children aged 4-8. A reviewer for Kirkus said "Teachers especially will turn to this good-natured story".

Sometimes I Feel Like a Nut: Essays and Observations From An Odd Mom Out was published in kindle format by HarperCollins e-books in February 2011. One reviewer said that the books observations could "deflate the overinflated egos among the Manhattan elite", and that it also gave insight into Kargman's life.

The Rock Star in Seat 3A was published in 2012. A reviewer for USA Today summarized it as being "funny and irreverent, a brash and appealing account of a long-devoted fan-girl and how she copes with her rock idol fantasy come true".

Personal life

Kargman is the daughter of Arie L. Kopelman, former president of Chanel, and Coco Kopelman, who is known for promoting fundraising. Her younger brother Will Kopelman is an art consultant and is married to actress Drew Barrymore. Kargman attended Yale University, Spence School, and the Taft School.  Kargman's spouse, Harry Kargman, owns a company which provides mobile advertising. They have three children, Sadie, Ivy, and Fletch.

Kargman dislikes being called a socialite as she feels it negates the work she does. Her makeup and beauty rituals have been the subject of review.

Works

	 The Right Address, with Carrie Karasyov. Broadway Books, April 2004.

	 Wolves In Chic Clothing: A Novel, with Carrie Karasyov. Broadway Books, April 2005.

	 Momzillas. Broadway Books, April 2007.

	 Jet Set, with Carrie Karasyov. HarperCollins, January 2009.

	 Summer Intern, with Carrie Karasyov. HarperTeen, January 2009.

	 The Ex-Mrs. Hedgefund. Plume, February 2009.

	 Bittersweet Sixteen, with Carrie Karasyov. HarperTeen, October 2009.

	 Arm Candy: A Novel. Plume, May 2010.

	 Sometimes I Feel Like A Nut: Essays and Observations From An Odd Mom Out. HarperCollins e-books, February 2011.

	 Pirates and Princesses, with Sadie Kargman. Dutton Books for Young Readers, September 2011.

	 The Rock Star in Seat 3A. William Morrow, May 2012.


