
#Article: Rosie Rivera
#Type: regular article

Rosie Rivera (born Rosa Amelia Rivera) is an American television personality and current CEO of Jenni Rivera Enterprises. Rivera first gained media attention through her sister's (Jenni Rivera) death but she received wider notice after she began to star in Spanish-language reality shows. In late 2014, she and her family began to appear in the reality television series Rica, Famosa y Latina. In 2014, Rivera was reported to garner an estimated earnings of $4 million.

Life and career

Early life

Rosie Rivera was born to parents Rosa Saavedra and Pedro Rivera, who were undocumented immigrants from Mexico. Rivera is the younger sister to Latin singers, Jenni Rivera (deceased), Lupillo Rivera and the aunt of singer Chiquis Rivera.

2012-2013

On December 9, 2012, Rivera's sister, Jenni Rivera was presumed dead in a plane crash that went down near Iturbide, Nuevo León, Mexico. Jenni Rivera had just performed a concert the night before at the Arena Monterrey, and was en route to Mexico City to tape on the Mexican talent show La Voz... México, where she worked as coach in the second season based upon The Voice franchise. Shorlty after her sister's death, it was revealed that her sister left behind a letter that served as a will, stating that she (Rosie) will serve as CEO of Jenni Rivera Enterprises and she would take over management of her various business and music interests, her (Jenni Rivera's) assets, and care of her two minor children (their father, Jenni Rivera’s second husband, died in 2009).

In 2013, the third-season of Jenni Rivera's reality show, I Love Jenni aired. Rivera starred in the show, as she lived in her sister's house.

2014-present

In late 2014, she and her family began to appear in the reality television series Rica, Famosa, Latina. Rivera was reported to garner an estimated earnings of $4 million. Later that year, she and her family began to appear in the Spanish-language reality television series, Rica, Famosa, Latina.

Filmography


