
#Article: Adam Lisagor
#Type: regular article

Adam David Lisagor (born February 25, 1978) is an American commercial director and the founder of Sandwich Video, an Internet and television commercial production company. He is best known for his appearances on-camera as a pitchman for various tech companies and products.

Early life and education

Lisagor was born and raised in Camarillo, California. He graduated from New York University's Tisch School of the Arts in 2000 with a BFA in film production.

Career

Visual effects

After editing for a commercial production company in New York, in 2002 Lisagor returned to Los Angeles, where he began working in visual effects on films. He worked for the visual effects company Hydraulx from 2003 to 2008 as a visual effects coordinator and compositor on films such as The Day After Tomorrow, Æon Flux and Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem.

Sandwich Video

Lisagor shot his first web commercial in 2009 for Birdhouse, an iPhone app he developed with his collaborator Cameron Hunt, for drafting and publishing writing on Twitter. To promote the app, Lisagor created and starred in a two-minute commercial, shot in the backyard of his Los Angeles apartment. The commercial generated interest from other tech companies looking to promote their apps in a similar fashion, and Lisagor began making commercials for these companies, with the biotechnology firm Genentech and Twitter co-founder Jack Dorsey's startup Square his first two major clients.

In 2010, Lisagor founded the Los Angeles-based video advertising company Sandwich Video. The firm specializes in helping startups and apps get noticed with short, entertaining, informative videos, and has earned notice for frequently accepting a combination of cash, equity and revenue sharing from a client in lieu of full payment. Their videos are typically one-and-a-half to two minutes long. They also work with larger clients and ad agencies, and produce television commercials in addition to online video ads.

Sandwich's clients include Square, Airbnb, Warby Parker, Groupon, Slack, TrueCar, eBay, CenturyLink, Yahoo!, Lyft and Jawbone. The firm's 2014 ad for Coin, which Lisagor appeared in, earned over 7 million views in its first month on YouTube, had 9.7 million views by the end of the year.

As of December 2014, Lisagor has appeared in over 25 of Sandwich Video's 160 branded videos, including those for Square and Flipboard, as an accessible, deadpan Everyman type. Inc. magazine called him "the Martin Scorsese of online video advertising" and Bloomberg Businessweek noted that he is "the director of choice among Silicon Valley startups looking to gain visibility." Sandwich spots have been praised for their minimalist style and charming, passionate tone. Fast Company called the firm "the premier producer of online product videos for web services and tech gadgets."

Podcast and web series

From 2008 to 2013, Lisagor co-hosted and produced the comedic podcast You Look Nice Today. He also produced the men's fashion web series Put This On with public radio show host Jesse Thorn from 2009 to 2011.

In October 2015, Lisagor co-created and directed a 1980's inspired public television show Computer Show''''. 

Personal life

Lisagor lives in Los Angeles, California, with his partner, Roxana Altamirano, and their son.  


