
#Article: Alicia Silverstone
#Type: regular article

Alicia Silverstone (; born October 4, 1976) is an American actress, producer, author, and activist. Silverstone made her film debut in The Crush, earning the 1994 MTV Movie Award for Best Breakthrough Performance, and gained further prominence as a teen idol when she appeared in three music videos for the band Aerosmith. She starred in the 1995 sleeper hit Clueless (which earned her a multimillion-dollar deal with Columbia) and in the big-budget 1997 film Batman & Robin, in which she played Batgirl. She has continued to act in film and television and on stage. For her role in the short-lived drama comedy, Miss Match, Silverstone received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress - Television Series Musical or Comedy. A vegan, Silverstone endorsed PETA activities and published a book titled The Kind Diet.

Early life

Silverstone was born in San Francisco, California, the daughter of British parents Deirdre "Didi" (née Radford), a Scottish former Pan Am flight attendant, and Monty Silverstone, an English real estate agent. She grew up in Hillsborough, California. Her father was born to a Jewish family and her mother converted to Conservative Judaism before marriage. Silverstone began modeling when she was six years old, and was subsequently cast in television commercials, the first being for Domino's Pizza. She attended Crocker Middle School and then San Mateo High School.

Career

Silverstone won several awards for her film performances. She received multiple MTV Movie Awards and a Young Artist Award for The Crush. For Clueless she received multiple MTV Movie Awards and a Young Artist Award once again, plus awards from Blockbuster Entertainment Award, Kids' Choice Awards, National Board of Review, and an American Comedy Award.

1990s

Her first credited acting role was in The Wonder Years starring Fred Savage in the episode entitled "Road Test", as Savage's high school "dream girl". Silverstone then won a leading part in the 1993 film The Crush, playing a teenaged girl who sets out to ruin an older man after he spurns her affections; she won two awards at the 1994 MTV Movie Awards for the role—Best Breakthrough Performance and Best Villain. Silverstone became legally emancipated at the age of 15 in order to work the hours required for the shooting schedule of the film. Silverstone made some television movies in her early career including Torch Song, Cool and the Crazy and Scattered Dreams. In addition, Silverstone was almost chosen to play the lead role of Angela Chase in the critically acclaimed cult television series My So-Called Life before production of the pilot episode began. The role eventually went to Claire Danes.

After seeing her in The Crush, Marty Callner decided Silverstone would be perfect for a role in a music video he was directing for the band Aerosmith, called "Cryin'"; she was subsequently cast in two more videos, "Amazing" and "Crazy." These were hugely successful for both the band and Silverstone, making her a household name (and also gaining her the nickname, "the Aerosmith chick"). After seeing Silverstone in the three videos, filmmaker Amy Heckerling decided to cast her in Clueless.

Clueless became a sleeper hit and critical darling during the summer of 1995. As a result, she signed a deal with Columbia-TriStar valued between $8 and $10 million. As part of the package, she got a three-year first look deal for her own production company, First Kiss Productions. Silverstone also won "Best Female Performance" and "Most Desirable Female" at the 1996 MTV Movie Awards for her performance in the film. In the same year Silverstone starred in the erotic thriller, The Babysitter, film adaptation of the novel by Dean Koontz, Hideaway, and the French drama about Americans, New World.

Silverstone's next role was as Batgirl in Batman & Robin, and while it was not a critical success, the film grossed $238,207,122 worldwide. Silverstone's turn as Batgirl was not well received, and won her a Razzie Award for Worst Supporting Actress. She also, however, won a Blimp Award at the Kid's Choice Awards for the role. Also released in 1997 was Excess Baggage, the first movie by Silverstone's production, Silverstone starred in the Saturn Award-nominated romance/comedy film Blast from the Past which also stars Brendan Fraser, Christopher Walken and Sissy Spacek. In VH1's 40 Hottest Hotties of the '90s she was ranked #5.

2000s

In 2000, Silverstone appeared in Kenneth Branagh's film adaptation of the William Shakespeare's Love's Labour's Lost, in which she was required to sing and dance. In 2001, Silverstone provided the voice of Sharon Spitz, the lead character in the Canadian animated television Braceface. During this time, she also appeared in the films Global Heresy and Scorched. In 2002, she made her Broadway debut alongside Kathleen Turner and Jason Biggs in The Graduate. After removing herself from the public eye for a few years, she resurfaced in the short-lived 2003 NBC television series Miss Match, which was canceled after 11 episodes. Silverstone later acknowledged that she hates the trappings of fame, saying, "Fame is not anything I wish on anyone. You start acting because you love it. Then success arrives, and suddenly you're on show".

After the cancellation of Miss Match in 2003, Silverstone did a pilot with Fox called Queen B, in which she played a former high school prom queen named Beatrice (Bea) who has discovered that the real world is nothing like high school. It was not picked up for production. In 2005, she co-starred with Queen Latifah in Beauty Shop, a spinoff of the BarberShop films, as one of the stylists in the beauty shop. In the same year, she played a reporter alongside Sarah Michelle Gellar and Freddie Prinze, Jr. in Scooby Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed, which did well financially, and appeared in the direct-to-video film Silence Becomes You.

In 2006, Silverstone starred in an ABC pilot called Pink Collar, in which her character worked in a law firm. Like Queen B, this pilot was not picked up for syndication. That year, she also starred alongside Alex Pettyfer, Ewan McGregor and Mickey Rourke in the film Stormbreaker, and appeared in the Hallmark Hall of Fame made-for-TV movie Candles on Bay Street, based on the book by Cathie Pelletier. Silverstone continued her theatre work, next appearing in David Mamet's Boston Marriage and Speed-the-Plow. In 2008, she filmed another ABC pilot alongside Megan Mullally called Bad Mother's Handbook and made a cameo appearance in the comedy film Tropic Thunder.

In early 2009, Silverstone starred in the world premiere of Donald Margulies's Time Stands Still at the Geffen Playhouse LA. The play focuses on a longtime couple and journalistic team who return to New York from an extended stint in the war-torn Middle East. She also starred in the music video for Rob Thomas's 2009 single "Her Diamonds".

Silverstone filmed a small segment in Elektra Luxx, a sequel to Women In Trouble. Director Sebastian Gutierrez cut her segment but will possibly use it for a third installment, tentatively titled Women In Ecstasy.

2010s

In 2010, she reprised her role in Time Stands Still alongside Laura Linney in the New York production of the play on Broadway, which premiered on January 28, 2010, directed by Daniel Sullivan, who described Silverstone as "a breath of fresh air." The play received good reviews with The New York Times praising Silverstone, saying she "brings warmth, actorly intelligence and delicate humour."

Silverstone next starred in the teen romance The Art of Getting By, which premiered at the 2011 Sundance Film Festival. and appeared in four episodes of Suburgatory, reuniting with her Clueless castmate Jeremy Sisto.

Her next role was in Butter as the adoptive mother of a 12-year-old African American girl who enters a local butter sculpture competition in a small Iowa town. Rob Corddry, who plays her husband, invited her to appear in an episode of his show Childrens Hospital. She also reunited with Clueless director Amy Heckerling in Vamps, playing one of two vampires who fall in love and face a choice that could jeopardise their immortality. She was offered the role after Heckerling came to see her in Time Stands Still.

Silverstone later returned to Broadway in the 2012 New York production of The Performers and starred in Angels in Stardust, and Ass Backwards. In 2013, she shot TV pilot HR, which was not picked up.

In 2011 she starred in the film adaptation of Marie Phillips's novel Gods Behaving Badly, however as of 2014, it remains unreleased.

She is to appear in Who Gets the Dog?.

Personal life

Silverstone has two older siblings, a half-sister from her father's previous marriage named Kezi Silverstone and a brother named David Silverstone. She married her longtime boyfriend, rock musician Christopher Jarecki, in a beachfront ceremony at Lake Tahoe on June 11, 2005. After meeting outside a movie theater in 1997, the couple dated for eight years prior to their marriage. They got engaged about a year before their marriage, and Jarecki presented Silverstone with an engagement ring that had belonged to his grandmother. They live in an eco-friendly Los Angeles house, complete with solar panels and an organic vegetable garden. Silverstone bought the house, shared with a "menagerie of rescued dogs", in 1996.

In 2009, Silverstone released The Kind Diet, a guide to vegan nutrition, and launched its associated website The Kind Life. The Kind Diet has topped the Hardcover Advice & Misc. category of The New York Times Best Seller list. In 2014, her follow up book The Kind Mama was published. She plans to write a third, The Kind Diet Cookbook.

In May 2011, Silverstone gave birth to a boy, whom they named Bear Blu Jarecki. In March 2012, she received media attention for uploading a video of herself feeding pre-chewed food to her son from her own mouth.

Political beliefs

Silverstone is noted for being an animal rights and environmental activist. She became a vegan in 1998 after attending an animal rights meeting, saying "I realized that I was the problem … I was an animal lover who was eating animals." She has stated she struggled with childhood vegetarianism, stating "at eight years old it's hard to stick to your guns - and so through the years I was always starting and stopping trying to be a vegetarian."

In 2004, Silverstone was voted "Sexiest Female Vegetarian" by PETA. In 2007, Silverstone appeared nude in a print advertisement and 30-second commercial for PETA championing vegetarianism; the TV spot was subsequently pulled from the Houston, Texas market by Comcast Cable. Silverstone has set up a sanctuary for rescued pets in Los Angeles. In 2012, during the trial of Russian band Pussy Riot, she wrote a letter to Vladimir Putin asking that vegan meals be made available to all Russian prisoners.

Federal campaign contribution records list Silverstone contributing $500 USD to Dennis Kucinich's 2004 presidential campaign. She supported Barack Obama's presidential candidacy.

In 2009, she appeared in "A Gaythering Storm", a Funny or Die spoof internet video parodying anti-same-sex marriage commercial "The Gathering Storm." She appeared in "My Mother's Red Hat" with Alanis Morissette parodying indie movies.

Filmography

Film

Television

Other credits

Awards and nominations

She was awarded a Heart Of Green Award in 2009, which "recognizes individuals, organizations or companies who have helped green go mainstream." In 2010, she was awarded a Voice Of Compassion Award by the Physician's Committee For Responsible Medicine for "shining a spotlight on the powerful health benefits of a vegan diet."


