
#Article: Arnulf Bryan Fuentebella
#Type: regular article

Arnulf Bryan B. Fuentebella (commonly known as "Arnie") is the Municipal Mayor of Tigaon, in the province of Camarines Sur. He is the second son of former Speaker of the Philippine House of Representatives Arnulfo P. Fuentebella and Sagñay Municipal Mayor Evelyn Buquid Fuentebella. His brother is Camarines Sur's 4th district Representative Felix William B. Fuentebella.

Early Life and Education

Arnulf Bryan "Arnie" Fuentebella was born in January 29, 1976 in Tigaon to former Speaker of the Philippine House of Representatives and Congressman Arnulfo P. Fuentebella and Sagñay Municipal Mayor Evelyn B. Fuentebella.

He graduated in the University of the Philippines Diliman being a Philosophy graduate. He then became an entrepreneur before he was called to enter politics like his forebears and predecessors.

He is happily married to Anjeanette Valera Turalba with his 3 daughters Mica, Brie, and Kiara.

Political and Professional Career

When his father Arnulfo P. Fuentebella returned to Congress in 1992, Arnie was alrady helping him. He officially entered politics after barangay captains of Tigaon asked him to run for Mayor in the 2007 elections as Tigaon is lagged behind its neighboring towns because of politics. He successfully won the elections over the incumbent mayor.

Accomplishments as Municipal Mayor

Since he assumed office as the Municipal Mayor of Tigaon, he made numerous accomplishments, as follows:

	Refurbished the Municipal Hall and built an extension for more offices.

	Set up a reliable, computerized data base for preparing the socio-economic profile and a municipal ID system.

	Implemented the Anti-Red Tape Act and published Tigaon's Citizen Charter.

	Improved tax collections by more than 300% in 2008 from 2006 and increased the municipality's annual gross income.

	Established Tigaon Infirmary as a 24/7 hospital that can respond to emergencies and provide curative health care.

	Provided initial funding for a pharmacy at the infirmary.

	Set up the Tigaon Municipal Health Office.

	Opened Tigaon Assistance Welfare Office.

	Put up an extension campus of Partido State University in Tigaon.

	Granted scholarships to hundreds of students, including 450 currently enrolled in PSU, Sta. Clara College and TESDA

	Oversaw the 100% energization of Tigaon's barangays and monitored progress for total energization of sitios.

	Refurbished the Municipal Museum and Library.

	Enabled the opening in Tigaon of the first Land Bank branch in Partido.

	Constructed a 44 million peso grains center as part of Tigaon's aim to be the agri-business center for Partido.

	Organized the Corn Husk Association of Tigaon to provide livelihood opportunities making handicraft out of corn husk.

	Provided students with seedlings for tree planting at Mount Isarog National Park.


