
#Article: Hadi Jelveh
#Type: regular article

Hadi Jelveh, (French: Hadi Djelveh, Farsi: هادی جلوه; jel'vehː; 21 March 1919 - 8 December 2011) was an Iranian-born Supreme Court judge.

Early life

Born in the city of Rasht in the province of Guilan, Iran in 1919 (or 1298 Solar Hijri calendar) to Mohammad Reza Jelveh, a prominent lawyer who also represented royalty in Iran and Nosrat Poordavoodi. His father died when he was 17 years old. He completed his secondary studies at Shahpour High School in the city of Rasht, Gilan where he received numerous awards for his academic achievements.

Later, he moved to Tehran, Iran and enrolled and completed his law degree from the University of Tehran.

Career

After graduation, he returned to Rasht and served as an assistant prosecutor and worked his way up to become a prosecutor and then a judge in the city of Rasht. Later he became the head of Ministry of Justice for city of Lahijan, Province of Guilan. In 1951, he married Manijeh Sonia Samii (Rasht, Guilan, Iran) and had their first of six children in 1952. During his tenure, as a judge in Guilan, he presided over many challenging cases. In one case, he defended farmers against a very powerful and influential family in city of Rasht. He was asked to dismiss the complaints by many peers for the fear that it would cost him his job. But he refused. As a result of far reaching influences that the defense had over the Ministry of Justice in Province of Guilan, he was reassigned to work as a Judge in city of Shiraz, in Province of Fars, but once again he refused to comply. He fought hard and remained steadfast that he had done nothing wrong to lose his judgeship in Rasht. After many unsuccessful and exhaustive efforts to regain his post which lasted almost 7 months, he finally wrote a letter to Shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, complaining about the treatment he had received as a judge while working on this case at the Ministry of Justice in Province of Guilan. He pleaded in his letter "... that that he was being wronged by the application of existing if I had done something wrong, He should not reassigned to another position. With 48 Hours a decree was issued by the late Shah that he should be reinstated to his judgeship position in Rasht. His reinstatement to the bench in Rasht made him an instant celebrity in Rasht, as a person who fought to protect the rights of the underprivileged. While on the bench, he challenged prosecutors to send him cases involving real criminals, such as drug traffickers and not the end user (the addict. He believed resources of justice system would be better utilized in handling the source of the problems and not its symptoms.

He was later offered and accepted the position as head of the Justice department office in the province of Esfahan for 8 months and later in Shiraz for 1 year. He later returned to Tehran and became associate justice at Divan-eh-Kay-far.

France and Italy

In 1963, he decided to continue his law studies and took an unpaid leave of absence from the bench and traveled to Paris, France along with his family. While in Paris, enrolled in the doctorate program at the University of Sorbonne, where he met with Dr. Pascuali (at the coroner’s office) who put him in contact with Professor Fillipo Gramatica an Italian legal scholar who had worked on the topic of social defense, had written the constitution for the Republic of San Marino. Hadi sent a copy of his research on Social Defense. On the invitation of Dr. Gramatica, he went to Italy to meet with him. Prof. Gramatica then encourage him to continue his work on Social Defense. He also met Prof. Giacello Canepa from the University of Genova who was also a scholar in criminology. While in Europe, he worked for UNESCO reporting on the conditions of prisons in several European cities. In 1967, he was awarded a doctorate degree in Criminology from the University of Sorbonne, Paris, France. While abroad, he mastered the French language and came to know and work with the some of the greatest legal minds and most famous criminologist of the time, such as Dr. Fillipo Gramatica, Dr. Marc Ancel (professor in the faculty of law of the University of Paris and president of one of the chambers of the Court of Appeals of France), Prof. George Levaseur, Prof. Pierre Buza. His thesis was published in the journal "Revue internationale de droit comparé and Revue de science criminelle et de droit pénal comparé".

Iran

Upon his return to Iran from France he became the first head of the bureau of crime statistics (daftar Motaleat and barrasyhaya vazarat dadghostai) at the Ministry of Justice. Later, he became "Dadyar Divan Keshvar" aka assistant Solicitor General of Iran.

He continued to worked his way up the judiciary hierarchy in the capital city from an assistant district attorney to presiding judge of the 12th circuit court in Tehran, and later as presiding judge of the higher criminal court branch 6 during which many high profile capital punishment cases were tried before him in a grand room (Talar Alli-eh Jenaii) where judges appeared in official Salam "salām سلام" black judicial robes and there was ample sitting for journalists and spectators. While working in Tehran, he presided over many high profile criminal and civil cases involving foreign nationals from the United States of America, Armenian, etc.His last position was the Associate Justice of the Supreme Court.

In 1977, he was offered to serve as the Governor of Province of Shiraz, Iran. But he respectfully declined the offer.

After the 1977 Islamic Revolution, Chief Justice of Iran, Mohammad Beheshti asked him to remain at his post. However, he had already decided to step down and establish a private law practice. He was awarded the Iranian Bar Association blind justice statue award during his tenure at the justice department. He was selected to represent several banks i.e. Bank-e-Tejarat (Tejarat Bank).

He taught law at the National Police Academy in Tehran and Khom School of Law near the city of Ghom and well as in University of Meli. As a lawyer, he tried to represent clients who had legal as well as moral standings. He conducted very thorough investigations to ensure that his clients were truthful before he accepted their cases. He worked pro bono on many cases, since many of his clients did not have the money to hire him to defend them. He was extremely proud of his work and took pride in that he always applied the law in a fair and respectful manner.

He was later asked to return to work for the justice department, Mahmoud Hashemi Shahroudi, but he respectfully declined.

He had full command of Farsi, French and Arabic languages.

Publications

While practicing law, he also worked on several publications. 

	Defence Sociale (English: Social Defense) 1st and 2nd edition.

	Divan-eh Hakim Sabouri (Farsi: حکیم صبوری)

	Eghlim-E-Eshgh (Farsi: اقلیم عشق)

	Danesh Guilani

His works were cited in many legal publications such as:

	Human Rights and The Legal System In Iran, Two Reports by William J. Butler, Esq. and Professor Georges Levasseur. INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION OF JURISTS. Geneva, Switzerland. March, 1976

	Quelques réflexions sur prévention et répression d'après l'expérience des cours d'assises françaises, belges et italiennes, Publisher:Sirey,Place of Publication:Paris, 1973 Language:French. Biblioteca da Procuradoria Geral da República

Last years and death

He closed down his practice and retired in Vancouver, Canada where he continued his research on various legal unpublished topics, but his health grew worse over time and eventually he died on December 8, 2011 in North Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. He left behind his wife, 6 children and 7 grandchildren.


