
#Article: Paulina Rubio
#Type: regular article

Paulina Susana Rubio Rue (; born 17 June 1971) is a Mexican singer, actress, television music competition judge, hostess, model and businesswoman also known as Queen Of Latin Pop, The Latin Madonna and La Chica Dorada (The Golden Girl). She is known in Mexico, other Hispanic-American countries and in Spain as an original member of the pop group Timbiriche from 1981 through 1991.Rubio has sold over 20 million records worldwide as a solo artist. and is considered one of the most influential Latin celebrities in the world by Univision.

Her debut album, La Chica Dorada (1992) was released under EMI Music and it reached position number 42 in Billboard Top Latin Albums and number 2 in Billboard Latin Pop. Her first single Mío debuts in Billboard in position number 19 in Hot Latin Tracks and reach position number 3, next singles Sabor A Miel, Amor De Mujer, Abriendo Las Puertas Al Amor, also reached a position in Billboard Hot Latin Tracks. Her next abum singles 24 Kilates (1993) Nieva Nieva and Vuelve Junto A Mí reached position 27 y 20 respectively in Billboard Hot Latin Tracks. Her follow-up albums, El tiempo es oro (1995) and Planeta Paulina (1996) helped Rubio become better known in Hispanic America. Planeta Paulina is after La Chica Dorada the best-selling album with EMI Music, exceeding 3.0 million copies worldwide. Rubio's departure from EMI Music happened in the same year. Paulina rejected the contract by paying a lot of money to be free from EMI Music looking for freedom of expression and creativity.

With her new label, Universal Music, she released her fifth studio album Paulina (2000) and her crossover album Border Girl (2002), both had commercial success in Latin America, Europe, USA and Japan; the first of these was nominated and won many awards. According to Billboard, Paulina was the best selling Latin album in the United States in 2001, selling over 1 million copies in the US alone. Paulina has sold more than 4 million copies. Paulina Rubio is the only mexican singer with two RIAA-certified Gold record STANDARD TYPE in USA with albums Paulina and Border Girl, her album Paulina reached certifications in RIAA for 1 Gold Record (Latin Type) for 30,000 sold copies, 1 Platinum (Latin Type), 2 MultiPlatinum (Latin Type), 4 Multiplatinum (Latin Type), 8 Multiplatinum (Latin Type) and 1 Gold record STANDARD TYPE for 500,000 sold copies. Album Border Girl also reached a Gold record STANDARD TYPE in RIAA for 500,000 sold copies in USA. Album Paulina is considered one of the most biggest selling albums of all time in México´s music history. and reached in Mexico two diamond records for 2'000,000 sales worldwide. Her follow-up albums, Pau-Latina (2004) and Ananda (2006) consolidated Rubio internationally as the most successful Mexican super star in the world. Her ninth album, Gran City Pop (2009) had a fresh and original concept, and focused in vision, to reflect Paulina's life and musical experiences she had while traveling the world. Her latest album Brava! (2011) focuses in electronic genres. In 2012, Rubio served as a coach on the second season of La Voz... Mexico. In 2013, Rubio became a coach on La Voz Kids, and also became a judge on the American version of The X Factor.

According to E! Entertainment, the singer reached number 12 on the 25 Sexiest Pop Divas list.

Early life

As Rubio says "I have been famous since I was born", as she is the daughter of Mexican actress Susana Rue, best known by her stage name Susana Dosamantes, and Enrique Rubio, a lawyer. Rubio was born in Mexico City, Distrito Federal, Mexico. Rubio has a younger brother named Enrique.

From the age of 5, Rubio was taking singing, acting, jazz, painting, and dance lessons while enrolled at what is now the Centro de Educación Artística (CEA) in Mexico. After two years there, Rubio’s parents were contacted by Julisa and Guillermo del Bosque for approval of Rubio’s joining a band that would be formed by children from the center.

Career

1982-99: Early work

On 30 April 1982, she began her singing career when she was ten years old under the guidance of Miguel Bosé, debuting in the popular children's pop group Timbiriche. The original band had seven members: Alix Bauer, Benny Ibarra, Diego Schoening, Mariana Garza, Paulina Rubio, Sasha Sökol, and Erik Rubín (who joined a year later). Other members, who joined later, of the band were Eduardo Capetillo, Thalía, and Edith Márquez. Rubio recorded 11 albums as part of Timbiriche. In 1985, Timbiriche participated in the musical Vaselina (Spanish adaptation of the American musical Grease). Having gained popularity in Timbiriche and inspired by Thalia's increasing international success in telenovelas, Rubio turned to acting in telenovelas with Televisa. She landed her first role in 1988 as the villain Paulina Montenegro in Pasión y Poder (Passion and Power). In 1992 she starred in Baila Conmigo (Dance With Me), one of the biggest telenovelas of that year, as Andrea. Two soundtracks, Baila Conmigo and Recuerdos de Baila Conmigo, were released. Members of the soap opera performed on Siempre en Domingo (Always on Sunday), among other TV programs.

In 1991, Rubio left Timbiriche to focus on a solo career. She moved to Spain to begin work on her first album with Arely García. In 1992 she released her debut album, La Chica Dorada, under the EMI label; the album's title would quickly become Rubio's trademark nickname. La Chica Dorada was certified Diamond in 1997 in her native Mexico, and she was presented with an award during her promotion of Planeta Paulina on Verónica Castro's defunct music show, La Tocada. The first single, "Mío", is Rubio's signature song and peaked at No. 3 on Billboard's Hot Latin Tracks while reaching No. 2 in Mexico and No. 1 in Spain; "Amor de Mujer", "Abriendo las Puertas al Amor", and "Sabor a Miel" were released as the following singles, reaching No. 8, No. 9, and No. 22 respectively on the Hot Latin Tracks. "Sabor a Miel" peaked at No. 2 while "Abriendo las Puertas al Amor" peaked at No. 3 on the Mexican charts.

In 1993, she released her sophomore effort, 24 Kilates, which sold 150,000 copies in two weeks of its release. The album peaked at No. 1 in Mexico. "Nieva, Nieva" was released as the first single which reached No. 27 on the Hot Latin Tracks and became Paulina's first No. 1 single in Mexico. "Él Me Engañó" and "Asunto de Dos" were released in Mexico and peaked at No. 1 and No. 5 respectively. The same year, Rubio received two nominations for the 1993 Premio Lo Nuestro Awards for the categories Female Pop Artist and New Pop Artist of the Year.

In 1995, El Tiempo Es Oro was released. It includes the hits "Te Daría Mi Vida" and "Nada de Ti" which peaked at No. 1 in Mexico while "Hoy Te Dejé De Amar" peaked at #9. Also included on the album was the theme song and title-track to the 1994 Mexican film Bésame En La Boca, in which she also starred as the lead role.

In 1996, she released her last album under the EMI Latin label, Planeta Paulina, which included the hit single "Enamorada" which peaked at No. 2 in Mexico. "Pobre Niña Rica" was featured as the theme song of the 1995 telenovela in which she also starred as Alma, Pobre Niña Rica. Rubio also recorded English versions of several songs which did not appear on the album. Some of these songs were released years later on the hits compilation I'm So in Love: Grandes Éxitos. The first single off the album "Siempre Tuya Desde La Raíz" peaked at No. 1 in Mexico while Sólo Por Ti peaked at #7.

EMI declined to release Paulina's first English crossover album, which was supposed to be the English version of the Planeta Paulina album. Because of that, Rubio got in a legal battle against EMI for not fulfilling what they had already planned. She eventually had to pay money so EMI could let her leave the record company.

After Planeta Paulina, Rubio took the longest break of her career. She left the music scene and moved to Spain where she dealt in a little bit of everything. Except for her participation in 1998's successful Reencuentro Tour with Timbiriche, Rubio was absent from the music scene for nearly four long years.

2000-02: Paulina and Border Girl

Paulina's return to the music scene began in the summer of 1999 when she recorded Richard Daniel Roman's "Vive El Verano", the theme song to a summer TV show where she was the host of in Spain. Vive El Verano was the first single under her new record contract with Universal Music.

On 23 May 2000 Rubio released her fifth and most successful studio album to date, Paulina. Paulina was nominated three times at the second annual Latin Grammy Awards for "Album of the Year", "Song of the Year", and "Best Female Pop Vocal Album." She became the winner of multiple prestigious awards. It became Rubio's first number 1 album on Billboard's Top Latin Albums chart, as well as the biggest selling Latin album of all 2001. The album Paulina has been certified 4× Platinum in Mexico for shipping 600,000 albums, while being certified 8× Platinum (Latin field) in the U.S. for shipments of 800,000 units. The album peaked at No. 156 on the Billboard 200 and was on the charts for more than 2-years. "Paulina" was the No. 1 album for the entire year of 2001 on Billboard's Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums.

The albums singles include the first single "Lo Haré Por Ti", the ranchera/hip-hop "El Último Adiós", the infectious "Y Yo Sigo Aquí", and the female empowerment anthem "Yo No Soy Esa Mujer" peaking at Nos. 13, 18, 3 and 7 respectively on Billboard's Hot Latin Tracks chart. Other releases include "Sexi Dance" and "Tal Vez, Quizá" which peaked at No. 34 and No. 42 on the same chart. All singles have peaked inside the top seven in Mexico proving that Rubio is one of Mexico's most famous and talented female singers of all time.

The success of the album Paulina was so enormous that Universal Music decided it was time for Rubio to begin work on her first English-language album. Later in 2009, Paulina was listed among the Top 10 best selling albums in the history of Mexico.

Paulina Rubio's presence in the English-language market came in 2002. On 18 June 2002, Border Girl, Rubio's first foray into English-language pop, was released. The album peaked at number 5 in Mexico, number 14 in Spain, and at number 9 in Canada. In the US, the album debuted at No. 11 on the Billboard 200 album chart and was certified Gold for selling 500,000 copies. Her debut English album gave Paulina the international recognition she had sought after for years.

The hit single "Don't Say Goodbye" peaked at the 41st position on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 songs chart, while the Spanish version reached No. 5 on the Hot Latin Tracks. The music video became a regular on MTV's Total Request Live. "The One You Love" was released as the second single reaching No. 98 on the Billboard Hot 100 and the Spanish version, "Todo Mi Amor", reached No. 5 on the Hot Latin Tracks chart, becoming her second top five hit from the album. Also, the Spanish version of the single "Casanova" reached No. 37 on the Hot Latin Tracks.

Rubio appeared on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, The Late Late Show with Craig Kilborn, and CD:UK, among others. She performed at international festivals, including Wango Tango, Festivalbar, and Festival di Sanremo in Italy. With the success of the album Border Girl, Rubio appeared in magazines including Rolling Stone, Stuff, and Blender. On 21 June 2002 the Houston, Texas radio station 104.1 KRBE declared 21 June "Paulina Day" in Houston.

In the fall of 2002, Rubio toured and performed material from Border Girl as the opening act for fellow Latin pop star Enrique Iglesias.

2004-07: Pau-Latina and Ananda

Paulina Rubio's 2004 comeback album, Pau-Latina, proved to be a huge success. Pau-Latina became Rubio's second album to debut at No. 1 on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart. The album peaked at No. 105 on the Billboard 200.

Pau-Latina won several awards during the year and was nominated for a Latin Grammy for "Best Pop Female Vocal Album" in 2004. In 2005, she was nominated for a Grammy Award for "Best Latin Pop Vocal Album." She was the only female nominated in that category.

The album's first single, "Te Quise Tanto", became her biggest single to date, reaching the top position on the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart for six non-consecutive weeks. It became Rubio's first No. 1 on this chart and peaked at No. 1 in most Latin American countries, as well as in Spain. The third single was "Dame Otro Tequila", which also peaked at No. 1 on the Hot Latin Tracks and only her second song to top the chart. It too peaked at No. 1 in Mexico and Venezuela. Other releases included "Algo Tienes" and "Mía", both which made the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks top ten, reaching No. 4 and No. 8 respectively, making Pau-Latina one of the few albums to provide four top ten hits.

The success of Pau-Latina opened doors for Rubio, as she hosted The MTV Latin America Awards for the first time. There she performed a mix of "Dame Otro Tequila" and Pitbull's "Culo". It was the first time a female artist hosted the event. Paulina Rubio was also named People en Españols 2005 Star of the Year.

Rubio attended the 2004 and 2005 Billboard Awards, performing "Te Quise Tanto" and "Algo Tienes", respectively.

She began her second solo tour and first solo world tour, called the Pau-Latina Tour in 2005 through 2006.

Paulina Rubio released the album Ananda on 19 September 2006. It reached the No. 1 spot in the U.S. and countries all over Latin America. It reached No. 25 on U.S. Billboard's Billboard Hot 200 albums chart, and it reached the No. 1 spot on Billboard's Top Latin Albums.Ananda received 2 "Billboard" awards. The first single released from "Ananda" was the rock/pop song Ni Una Sola Palabra which was Palina Rubio's third song to top the Billboard Hot Latin Songs and Pop Latin Songs. It stayed at No. 1 on the Hot Latin Songs for four consecutive weeks. The song peaked at No. 1 in Mexico and Spain as well as in most Latin American countries. In Spain the song was certified 3x platinum for sales of over 60,000. Ni Una Sola Palabra won a Billboard Award in 2007. The song was written specifically for Paulina Rubio by good friend Xabier San Martín, of the band La Oreja de Van Gogh.

Nada Puede Cambiarme was released as the second single from Ananda. The song had moderate success peaking at No. 21 on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs and No. 10 on the Mexican Chart. The music video as well as the song features legendary guitarist Slash from Guns N' Roses. The third single released from the album was "Ayúdame". It reached No. 36 on the Billboard Hot Lating Songs. Ayudame had more success on Mexico where it managed to reach #12. The music video was filmed in Puerto Rico and has a global warming theme. These songs were the only singles released from the album, but that did not prevent for other songs to be played in several radio stations across Latin America. A fourth/promotional single, "Que Me Voy A Quedar" which was written by Julieta Venegas was released in Spain to promote her hugely successful world tour "Amor, Luz Y Sonido". Ananda was certified and given a multi-platinum award for album sales of 250,000 in the U.S. and Puerto Rico. Rubio performed at the Nobel Peace Prize Gala in Oslo, Norway, alongside Rihanna, John Legend, and Lionel Richie, who also lined up to honor the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize recipient, Muhammad Yunus.

In 2007 Rubio was chosen by Miguel Bosé to record the song Nena as a duet. The song was released as the first single to promote the album Papito, which commemorated the 30-year career of the Spanish singer. "Nena" became a major hit in Mexico, peaking at No. 2 for several weeks. The song was the most played and successful single from the "Papito" album. The song "Nena" was nominated for Record of the Year at the 8th Annual Latin Grammys. In 2008, Rubio participated in the mega event ALAS, developed simultaneously in Mexico and Argentina. Rubio performed in Buenos Aires in front of 180,000 people, along with Shakira, Calle 13, Mercedes Sosa, Alejandro Sanz and Gustavo Cerati. Paulina embarked on her second world tour Amor, Luz Y Sonido in 2007.

In October 2007, Rubio was in a government probe about whether or not she had desecrated Mexico's flag. The Spanish edition of Cosmopolitan featured her apparently naked underneath a red, white, and green sheet. The Mexican government said she may have violated an article in the National Flag, Shield and Anthem Law, which states that "private individuals will give the appropriate respect to the national symbol and handle it with care." The offense can be punished by fines ranging from $45,000 to $50,000 MXN (Mexican pesos) and jail time of up to 36 hours. However, in a published report, her mother, Susana Dosamantes, said that the artist did not authorize such photos.

2009-10: Gran City Pop

Rubio released the album Gran City Pop on 23 June 2009, and was met with both critical acclaim and commercial success. The first single off the new album was called "Causa y Efecto". Speaking to a Mexican radio program, the "Golden Girl" said that the new material presented many changes, while also explaining: "At the same time I remain very loyal to my music - my rancheras, boleros with my... ...those rhythms with children - those children songs with such simple rhythms." The production has songs by Mario Domm, the leader of Camila, and Estéfano. She later continued: "There are some songs of mine with Coti; this is an album to get out the child from within us". It also includes work by Los Rabanes and Jeremías.

The album sold 10,788 copies in its first week of release in the United States. Later, a Spanish website published that Gran City Pop sold more than a million and a half copies worldwide. With the success of Gran City Pop, Rubio performed at many award shows. Rubio's big comeback took place in the month of April at the 2009 Latin Billboard Music Awards, where Rubio performed the lead single "Causa y Efecto" for the first time. Rubio performed live at Univision's Premios Juventud, singing "Causa y Efecto" with a different musical arrangement and choreography.

Rubio appeared at Los Premios MTV Latinoamérica 2009 on 15 October along with Cobra Starship, performing "Good Girls Go Bad" and "Ni Rosas Ni Juguetes". She was the female performer with the most nominations (and second most overall): Video of the Year, Best Artist, Best Pop Artist, Best Solo Act and Artist of the Year, winning Best Solo Act and Best Live Performance for her performance with Cobra Starship. Paulina began her Gran City Pop Tour, her third international trek, in September 2009. The album's first single, "Causa y Efecto", was released with incredible success, topping the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart for 5 consecutive weeks, as well as topping the charts for several weeks in Mexico. It became Paulina's fourth No. 1 on the Hot Latin Songs chart. The song also had success in Spain, where it topped the airplay charts for several weeks and peaked at No. 7 on the official chart, while topping the charts in several Latin American countries.

The second single released from Gran City Pop was "Ni Rosas Ni Juguetes", which peaked at No. 9 on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart and No. 5 on the Latin Pop chart. It is described as being ranchera/pop with a hip hop beat. The music video was directed by acclaimed director, Jessy Terrero. On 11 November 2009 she released the official remix of "Ni Rosas Ni Juguetes" with a new video and it featured the Cuban rapper Pitbull. The Mr. and Mrs. Smith themed video was premiered to the world in early 2010. Gran City Pop received a Grammy nomination at the 52nd Grammy Awards for "Best Latin Pop Album". The third single from the album was "Algo De Ti", which was released to radio on 22 March 2010 in Spain and on 19 May 2010 in the U.S. However, Universal Music Latino later declined to continue promotion of "Algo De Ti" to radio outlets, as a result it was unable to chart. It received radio support only from the Los Angeles-based KSSE 107.1 FM Súper Estrella station.

In February 2010, Paulina participated in a charity song for the people of Haiti, a cover of "We Are The World" in Spanish, titled "Somos El Mundo". Later on, Paulina announced via Twitter that a duet with a talented English singer would be released soon. A few weeks later, a duet featuring Paulina and English singer Taio Cruz leaked to the Internet, which later turned out to be a Spanglish version of Cruz's single "Dirty Picture". The collaboration was released on the Spanish edition of his album Rokstarr. In February 2011, it was confirmed that Paulina would participate on MTV Unplugged: Los Tigres del Norte and Friends, a live album by Los Tigres del Norte. Paulina and the band performed "Golpes en el Corazón", which was released as the first single off the album on 23 May 2011. Paulina was also featured in Gloria Trevi's album, Gloria, on the track "No Al Alguacil." The song was expected as the third single off Trevi's album, but failed to get a release.

2011-14: Brava! , La Voz...  and The X-Factor USA

In early August 2010, Paulina talked on her Twitcam about her upcoming projects including her next studio album. She said that her new album would be in Spanglish and would include songs in Spanish and English. She also hoped that the first single of the new material would be released in the middle or the end of 2011. Paulina also stated that she was writing songs with Nelly Furtado and Cobra Starship. In May 2011, Paulina announced on Twitter that she and Moroccan/Swedish producer/songwriter RedOne were working together on new music in Madrid. Billboard.com reports that, "She's been working with RedOne and writing with Julio Reyes Copello, Casadiego, Espinoza Paz, Chino y Nacho and Claudia Brant."

Paulina announced on Twitter that the first single off her new album would be released on 13 September 2011. "I want to be the first one to let you know my NEW single hits radio Sept 13th!!!!! Are you ready to dance?" stated Paulina on her Twitter. The announcement came only a few days after she tweeted a picture from the recording studio stating that she had just finished recording the single. On August, 30th Paulina announced also via Twitter that the first single for her new album would be named "Me Gustas Tanto" (I like you so much). According to LALATE, a celebrity news site narrowing in on Rubio's career, the single, "Me Gustas Tanto" made its debut on 2 September 2011 on the same site. The single was made available for purchase on Amazon.com starting on 6 September 2011, about a week before it would be released as a digital single worldwide. The single had been described as a fresh song with simple lyrics and a catchy beat. More than 30.000 viewers listened to the song on the first day of its premiere through Paulina Rubio's VEVO channel on YouTube. Paulina confirmed she'd be working on the official music video for the single on 15 September

The album was recorded between New York, Los Angeles, Jamaica and Madrid. Paulina said that the reason she wanted to do a Spanglish album is that she wanted to mix the language of her home Mexico and the United States; "I grew up in Mexico, but I've always been between the United States and my country. This is all done with a wink and a nod to 'Spanglish' culture, which continues to grow and has a foot in both worlds", the singer said. She stated in a radio interview that this album would be different from all her other albums because being a mother and the death of her father had inspired her tremendously. She also said that 70% of the album's songs would be in Spanish, while only 30% in English. She also confirmed that RedOne would be producing most of the 10 tracks on the standard edition, with some arrangements "between techno and rock band instruments like bass, drums and acoustic guitar."

Universal Music confirmed that Brava! would be the title of Paulina's new album. The production had 10 tracks, seven of which were in Spanish, while only 3 in English. It was released on 15 November. Paulina posted via Twitter the official cover of the new album, Brava!. Me voy was released as the album's second official single in Latin America on 14 February 2012, with a re-worked version featuring the Mexican singer-songwriter Espinoza Paz. A new English song titled "Boys Will Be Boys" was released in Europe on 24 March 2012. The song was released as the first single from Brava! Reload, an EP which included 8 songs in English produced by RedOne. The song was also produced by RedOne, who also produced the music video of the single. The video was filmed in London.

In 2012, two editions of the album were released and they included all the songs Paulina worked on with RedOne. Europe's edition was titled Brava! Reload and it was released on 24 July 2012, while the Latin American edition was called Bravísima! and was released on 18 September 2012 and the US edition, which many would say did not fair well in popularity, on 22 October. Both editions included Paulina's hit songs "Boys Will Be Boys" and "Me Gustas Tanto".

Rubio participated as a coach on the second season of La Voz... México along with Jenni Rivera, Miguel Bosè and Beto Cuevas. The second season premiered in Mexico on 9 September 2012.

Rubio was one of the three coaches for La Voz Kids, the singing competition for kids 7-14 on Telemundo. Although she was initially slated to return for the series' second season in 2014, on 23 December 2013, Telemundo announced that Rubio would be replaced by singer Natalia Jiménez. In January 2014, Rubio then sued Telemundo for alleged breach of contract.

In May 2013, it was confirmed that Rubio would become a new judge for season three of the American version of The X Factor alongside Simon Cowell, Demi Lovato and fellow new judge Kelly Rowland.

2015-present: Return to Music

After almost three years since the release of her previous single Boys Will Be Boys in 2012 and failed rejected unofficial single "Cuanto te Quiero", Rubio released the single "Mi Nuevo Vicio" featuring the new Colombian group Morat, on 17 February 2015. The song was promoted to fans via Paulina's website, Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook pages, as well as receiving promotion from her label Universal Music Latin Entertainment on their webpages and Twitter handles. Her official site relaunched in February 2015 to begin Rubio's new era. Fans on Twitter trended the hashtag, #PauRubioIsBack and #MiNuevoVicio to show their excitement for Rubio's new music. The song has seen success in Mexico and Spain, topping radio and iTunes Charts, and is still moderately climbing the Billboard charts in the US. Paulina journied to Spain to promote Mi Nuevo Vicio on various television programs and radios. It is only in Spain that it has seen its biggest success, remaining at #1 on the iTunes Charts for many weeks, and has certified gold while reaching #1 on Spain's Digital Songs chart. The music video was released on the same day the single was officially released, and has also seen a growing number of views.

Other ventures

In 2007, Paulina launched her own lipstick in partnership with M.A.C. titled "Rubia". Paulina stated, "I love wearing make-up and use MAC products on stage and off, it's suitable for all occasions. I was thrilled when M.A.C approached me to create a new shade of lipstick and I instantly thought it should be a bold, vibrant matte lipstick that will look sexy on all women."

In 2008, Paulina launched her own fragrance titled "ORO". The fragrance was released and created in conjunction with "Oracle Beauty Brands". It is an elegant floral oriental array of sparkling citrus that is awakened by hints of espresso bean and peppered florals, while being sweetened by a touch of vanilla. "This fragrance is for women like me who believe in themselves; are strong, fun and unpredictable, yet tender and loving. I put so much creativity and love into this fragrance, I feel as if a drop of me is in each and every bottle to be shared with my fans and all women", said Rubio.

Paulina has a restaurant in Miami Beach called L’Entrecote de Paris.

Rubio is dressed by the most prestigious and recognized designers which include her longtime friend Roberto Cavalli, Ina Soltani, Prada, Gucci, "Dolce & Gabbana", Alexander McQueen, etc.

Paulina has also ventured out into modeling. She has walked on runways of events from designer's such as "Alvin Valley", "Gaudí", Robero Cavalli, "Kiff-Kiff", etc. Paulina is also signed under "Elite Model Management" a prestigious modeling agency.

Paulina was the "face" of the opening campaign for the French fashion house "Louis Vuitton" in Latin America. Paulina has also long been the "face" for the Mexican "Andrea" shoes company.

Philanthropy and humanitarian work

In 2007, Paulina joined the Latino Commission on AIDS, an organization in the fight against the spread HIV/AIDS in the Latino community. Paulina became the first "Mexican Madrina" to partner with the organization. Paulina stated, "It is important to make our voice heard and try to bring back some of the care that the community shares each day". Rubio has been part of several videos in which she asks viewers to promote "safe sex" relationships to prevent the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.

On 17 May 2008, Paulina performed at the ALAS concert (América Latina en Acción Solidaria). The organization's mission is to strengthen and expand public and private sector support for Early Childhood Development in Latin America.

In 2009, Paulina received recognition from the "American Heart Association" for her work with the organization. Rubio also performed at the event to raise funds.

On 3 December 2009, Paulina held a press conference announcing the creation of an organization in partnership with the "Lili Claire Foundation" to provide assistance to children living with neurological disorders and their families. "Fundación Paulina Rubio" is a project inspired by children in anguish as a result of homelessness, birth defects, and lack of education among other pernicious plights that many face today. By directing funds through other pre-existing organizations, such as The Lili Claire Foundation, children will receive a unique and comprehensive blend of support services including medical and behavioral genetics clinics, psychosocial counseling, advocacy services, information libraries, and community outreach that will ultimately help improve the lives of families and children living with neurogenetic disorders.

The Paulina & Friends exclusive benefit concert for The Lili Claire Foundation showcased some of today's leading music stars, such as Luis Fonsi, Aleks Syntek, Noel Schajris, Reik and Fanny Lú, who joined Paulina on Saturday, 19 June. Paulina hosted the star studded fundraiser which took place at the Fillmore in the Jackie Gleason Theater in Miami Beach, Florida. The purpose of the event was to raise funds to build a family resource center. "My friends mean everything to me and I am happy to have the opportunity to share the stage with them to support this great cause" says Paulina. "All of them are excellent musicians and I know that as always, they’ll do their best to make this an unforgettable night." For his part, Jeff Simmons, community relations manager for The Lili Claire Foundation said, "I'm really surprised to see the number of artists who continue to join in on this great event, it's truly a blessing. Their contribution to the Paulina & Friends concert is spectacular and the Lili Claire Foundation will be forever grateful". Paulina & Friends will continue the celebration of musical performances where fans can join and live an unforgettable night to benefit The Lili Claire Foundation.

Personal life

On 30 April 2007, she married public relations executive Nicolás "Colate" Vallejo Nájera in Xcaret, a park on the Mayan Riviera in Cancún, Quintana Roo.

On 5 May 2010, Paulina announced through Twitter that she was expecting her first child. Her brother, Enrique Rubio, corrected the statement that she was supposedly expecting twins, which was not true. Paulina stated that if the child was a boy, he would be named after his father, Nicolás. If it was a girl, she would be named after Rubio's great-grandmother, Micaela. On 15 September 2010 Paulina announced on her Twitter page that she was expecting a boy. On Sunday, 14 November 2010, Paulina and her husband Nicolás Vallejo-Nájera welcomed their first child, a baby boy named Andrea Nicolás Vallejo-Nájera Rubio in Miami, Florida. Prior to the birth Paulina had planned on having a water birth at home, but was rushed to the hospital and spent the weekend with doctors working to stabilize the health of the baby. Hospital staff tried to send Rubio home so that she could realize her dream of a natural home birth, but the complications lead her medical team to schedule a c-section.

On 11 January 2011, her father, Enrique Rubio González, died at the age of 67 in a Mexico City hospital. A consensus of various news sources attributed his death to kidney failure.

In March 2012, Paulina's husband, Colate, told Hola! that he and Paulina were separating after nearly five years of marriage. "It has been a decision by both of us, though it’s possible that I have been more firm when it came to carrying it out," he said in an interview with the Spanish publication. "I have the feeling there is no going back," Vallejo-Nájera said, disclosing that he and Rubio had been living apart since November and that their only communication with each other was about their son, Andrea Nicolás, born in November 2010. Nevertheless, Colate said that he will always be "grateful to Paulina" for their time together. The divorce was finalized on March 2013.

Discography

	La Chica Dorada (1992)

	24 Kilates (1993)

	El Tiempo Es Oro (1995)

	Planeta Paulina (1996)

	Paulina (2000)

	Border Girl (2002)

	Pau-Latina (2004)

	Ananda (2006)

	Gran City Pop (2009)

	Brava! (2011)

Tours

	2001: Paulina Tour

	2002: Tour With Enrique Iglesias

	2004-2005: Pau-Latina Tour

	2007: Amor, Luz Y Sonido

	2009-2010: Gran City Pop Tour

	2012: Brava! Tour

Filmography

Films

Television

See also

	 List of awards received by Paulina Rubio

	 Latin pop


