
#Article: Steve Bacic
#Type: regular article

Steve Bacic (born March 13, 1965) is a Canadian actor of Croatian origin. He is known for playing the character Telemachus Rhade on the Sci-Fi series Gene Roddenberry's Andromeda. After being a guest star in season 1-3, he joined the cast early in season four. In total, he was in 44 of the 110 Andromeda episodes.Beginning in 2013, he co-starred as "Jason" in Hallmark Movies & Mysteries channel Garage Sale Mysteries series of TV films.

Early life

Bacic was born in Lisičić, a village in Croatia (then Yugoslavia) and raised in Windsor, Ontario, Canada. He has stated that acting was really his second choice - he really wanted to be a professional athlete and become either a coach or a physical therapist. After graduating from university with an honours degree in kinesiology, he spent some time at a factory job and, at one point, had his own auto refurbishing business and owned two houses. In his mid-twenties, a road trip with friends led to settling into Vancouver, Canada, where, intrigued by all the television and film production going on there, he decided to stay. He later took acting classes and met rising stars like Ethan Hawke in the process. He did a little work with Hawke and others in their movies and real auditions and a few modeling gigs followed. He went in to read for a bit part in the 5th season of 21 Jump Street but instead landed the lead guest-starring role - a first for a Canadian for the series.

Acting career

His television roles have included appearances on Street Justice, The Outer Limits, Highlander, Stargate SG-1, Smallville and The X-Files where he played a SWAT officer who douses himself with gasoline in a memorable episode. His film appearances include The 6th Day, Threshold, X2 and the Hallmark Channel film The Colt, and most recently, Deck the Halls, Safe Harbor and She Made Them Do It on Lifetime.

Bacic also played Prince Barin in the 2007 Flash Gordon TV series.His TV series The Guard premiered January 22, 2008 on GlobalTV in Canada. He plays Miro Da Silva, one of the four leads. The series is a drama series about the Canadian Coast Guard.He has been cast as "Dark Archer" in the ninth season of Smallville in episode 10 called "Disciple". He plays Goran on the HBO show Big Love, season 4.

Personal life

He is married with 3 children and enjoys sports, including basketball and snowboarding.

Filmography

TV

Awards


