
#Article: Cyrus Pallonji Mistry
#Type: regular article

Cyrus Pallonji Mistry (born 4 July 1968) is a businessman who became chairman of Tata Group, an Indian business conglomerate, on 28 December 2012. He is the sixth chairman of the group and the second not to be named Tata, after Nowroji Saklatwala. The Economist has described him as "the most important industrialist" in both India and Britain.

He is the youngest son of Indian construction magnate Pallonji Mistry.

Early life and education

Mistry studied at the Cathedral & John Connon School in Mumbai. He graduated from Imperial College, London with a B.S in civil engineering and holds a Master of Science in management from the London Business School. He is a fellow of the Institution of Civil Engineers.

Personal life

Cyrus Mistry is the youngest son of Pallonji Mistry, a construction tycoon; and Patsy Perin Dubash. Mistry's grandfather first bought shares in Tata Sons in the 1930s, a stake that, , stood at 18.5 percent, which is in the hands of Mistry's father, the largest single shareholder in a firm mostly controlled by trusts.  He has an elder brother, Shapoor Mistry, who is married to Behroze Sethna, the daughter of lawyer Rusi Sethna. Cyrus has two sisters, Laila and Aloo. His sister Aloo is married to Noel Tata, the half-brother of Ratan Tata. Laila is married to Rustom Jehangir.

Mistry is married to Rohiqa Chagla, the daughter of lawyer Iqbal Chagla and the granddaughter of renowned jurist M.C. Chagla. Together, Mistry and his wife have two sons.

Mistry is an Irish citizen, and a permanent resident of India. According to a news report in an Irish newspaper, The Independent, Mistry views himself as a global citizen and thinks the colour of his passport is unimportant.

Career

Mistry has been managing director of Shapoorji Pallonji & Company, which is part of the Shapoorji Pallonji Group. He joined the board of Tata Sons on 1 September 2006, a year after his father retired from it. He served as a Director of Tata Elxsi Limited, from 24 September 1990 to 26 October 2009 and was a Director of Tata Power Co. Ltd until 18 September 2006.

In 2012, Mistry was appointed as the chairman of Tata Sons. In addition, he is also chairman of all major Tata companies including Tata Industries, Tata Steel, Tata Motors, Tata Consultancy Services, Tata Power, Tata Teleservices, Indian Hotels, Tata Global Beverages and Tata Chemicals.


