
#Article: Anne Wojcicki
#Type: regular article

Anne E. Wojcicki ( ; born July 28, 1973) is an American biologist and the co-founder and chief executive officer of the personal genomics company 23andMe.

Early life

Wojcicki, the youngest of three daughters, was born in San Mateo County, California. Her parents are Esther Wojcicki (née Hochman), an educator, and Stanley Wojcicki, a physics professor emeritus at Stanford University. Her mother is Jewish and her father is a Polish American. Her sisters are Susan Wojcicki, CEO of YouTube and a former executive at Google and Janet Wojcicki, anthropologist and epidemiologist at the University of California, San Francisco.

Wojcicki grew up on the Stanford campus. When she was two, she learned how to figure skate, but later quit and started playing ice hockey. She attended Gunn High School in Palo Alto, California, and was an editor for The Oracle, the school newspaper, and won a scholarship for her sports stories. She attended Yale University, where she was a competitive ice skater and played on the varsity women's ice hockey team. She graduated with a B.S. in biology in 1996. She did molecular biology research at the National Institutes of Health and the University of California, San Diego.

Career

After graduating, Wojcicki worked as a health care consultant at Passport Capital, a San Francisco-based investment fund and at Investor AB. She was a health care investment analyst for 10 years, overseeing health care investments, focusing on biotechnology companies. Disillusioned by the culture of Wall Street and its attitude towards health care, she quit in 2000, intending to take the MCAT and enroll in medical school. Instead, she decided to focus on research.

In 2006, she co-founded 23andMe with Linda Avey. 23andMe is a privately held personal genomics and biotechnology company based in Mountain View, California that provides genetic testing.  The company is named for the 23 pairs of chromosomes in a normal human cell. The company's personal genome test kit was named "Invention of the Year" by Time magazine in 2008. In October 2013, The Fast Company named Wojcicki "The Most Daring CEO".

Personal life

Wojcicki married Google co-founder Sergey Brin in May 2007. They have a son, Benji Wojin, born in December 2008, and a daughter, Chloe Wojin, born in late 2011. News reports on August 28, 2013 announced that Wojcicki and Brin were living separately but that they were not legally separated. On March 16, 2015, Wojcicki filed for legal separation, which was approved on May 1, 2015. In March 2015 Wojcicki filed for divorce, which was finalized in June 2015.


