
#Article: David Marciano
#Type: regular article

David Marciano (born January 7, 1960, in Newark, New Jersey) is an American actor best known for his roles as Detective Raymond Vecchio in the television series Due South and Detective Steve Billings in the FX police drama The Shield. Marciano is currently cast as Virgil, a surveillance expert, in the Showtime television series Homeland.

In 1991, Marciano married Katayoun Amini (who played Vecchio's ex-wife Angie in Due South) and together they have two daughters and one son.

Background

Marciano grew up in north Newark. Newark was plagued by violent crime and Marciano was witness to a city in crisis. He has admitted to having a troubled youth. "I was hanging around on street corners, drinking, gambling, playing cards, going to the racetrack, shooting pool, all those kind of things." At the age of seventeen, Marciano was involved in a car crash after a night out partying and was lucky to survive. This prompted him to sort his life out and he enrolled at Northeastern University in Boston, Massachusetts, to study biomedical engineering. After a disappointing start Marciano transferred to economics and accounting for his second year before dropping out to pursue acting.

Career

In 1985, Marciano moved to California where he studied acting at the Drama Studio London in Berkeley, earning a living by working as a bartender. His big break came two years later as a guest star in Wiseguy, playing a mobster impersonating Lorenzo Steelgrave. In 1989 he played the diner owner Stanley in Pepsi's 'Diner' commercial shown in the UK.

More small parts followed, including Cop #1 in the film Lethal Weapon 2, before he played the role of bicycle messenger/poet Jeffrey Lassick in legal drama Civil Wars from 1991 - 1993. He was then cast as Detective Ray Vecchio in Due South in 1994. He played the part for two seasons before his character was written out, replaced by Detective Stanley Kowalski (Callum Keith Rennie), due to filming commitments. He returned for the series finale in 1999 where Vecchio and Kowalski's ex-wife got together. He then appeared in the 1996 season 3 episode of Touched By An Angel entitled "Into The Light" playing a dying man in need of a heart transplant. Later he took the role of Giorgio Clericuzio in the 1997 mini-series of Mario Puzo's The Last Don.

He then appeared in episodes of various TV shows, including Diagnosis: Murder, Judging Amy, Nash Bridges, JAG, The Division, NYPD Blue, NCIS, CSI: New York and CSI: Crime Scene Investigation and SeaQuest DSV. Between 2005 - 2008, he played Detective Steve Billings in The Shield. Since then, he has appeared in episodes of Joan of Arcadia, House, Lie to Me and Sons of Anarchy. He presently plays the recurring role of Virgil in Homeland.


