
#Article: Eric Wiebes
#Type: regular article

Eric Derk Wiebes (born 12 March 1963) is a Dutch politician for the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy. He serves as State Secretary of Finance since 4 February 2014 in the Second Rutte cabinet. His predecessor, Frans Weekers, resigned on 30 January. Wiebes earlier served as alderman for the municipality of Amsterdam between 2010 and 2014, holding the portfolio concerning traffic, ICT and infrastructure.

Early life and career

Wiebes was born in Delft but grew up in Muiderberg. His father, a nuclear physicist died when he was nine years old. He completed his v.w.o. (secondary education) in nearby Bussum, graduating in 1981. He continued his studies the same year at Delft University of Technology studying mechanical engineering. In 1986 he graduated, having specialized himself in policy functions concerning government. Wiebes then started working in the private sector, being employed at Shell, McKinsey & Company, and OC&C Strategy Consultants between 1987 and 2004. In 1991 he earned an MBA in business administration at INSEAD in Fontainebleau, France. From 2004 until 2010 he was employed at the Ministry of Economic Affairs, the last three years of which he was deputy secretary-general.

Political career

Wiebes discussed his future career together with MP Willibrord van Beek. Van Beek advised taking up a position as alderman. Wiebes declined two offers from smaller municipalities which he deemed not challenging enough. In 2010 the municipality of Amsterdam was searching for a new alderman from the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy. Eric van der Burg, the local party leader, informed if Van Beek knew a candidate, Van Beek then advised choosing Wiebes. Prime Minister Mark Rutte put Wiebes name forward as well. Wiebes accepted the offer. As alderman in Amsterdam Wiebes dealt with problematic topics such as the municipal ICT, air quality, construction of the new Noord/Zuidlijn metro-line, and the local taxi-market.

On 30 January 2014 Frans Weekers resigned as Secretary of Finance. As successor to Weekers Wiebes is tasked with solving the problems at the Dutch Tax and Customs Administration.

Personal life

Wiebes has two children. He is an atheist.


