
#Article: Maria Zakharova
#Type: regular article

Maria Zakharova (born December 24, 1975) is the Director of the Information and Press Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation (the official representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation) from August 10, 2015. Candidate of Historical Sciences.

Biography

Maria Zakharova was born December 24, 1975. Her parents were diplomats and she spent her childhood in Beijing, where the mother and father worked. In 1998 she graduated from the Faculty of International Journalism at MGIMO in the field of orientalism and journalism. Practice was held in the Russian embassy in Beijing.

From 2003 to 2005, she was the Head of the Department of Information and Press of the Ministry of Foregin Affairs of the Russian Federation. From 2005 to 2008, she was the press secretary of the Permanent Mission of the Russian Federation to the United Nations in New York. From 2008 to 2011, she was the Head of the Department of Information and Press of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.

From 2011 to August 10, 2015, Zakharova was the Deputy Head of the Department of Information and Press of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation. Her duties included organizing and conducting briefings Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokesman, the organization of work of official Ministry accounts in social networks and information support of foreign visits of the Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Maria Zakharova gained notoriety for her participation in political talk shows on Russian television and for contributing colorful commentary on sensitive political issues in social networks. She is one of the most quoted Russian diplomats. she is often compared to Jen Psaki (the official representative of the US State Department before March 31, 2015).

On August 10, 2015, by order of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Zakharova was appointed director of the Department of Information and Press.  Zakharova became the first woman in the history of the department to hold this post.


