
#Article: Randy Forbes
#Type: regular article

James Randy Forbes (born February 17, 1952) is an American politician. A member of the Republican Party, Forbes is the U.S. Representative for , serving since 2001. Prior to joining the United States Congress, he was a member of the Virginia House of Delegates, Virginia State Senate, and Chairman of the Republican Party of Virginia.

Forbes currently sits as Chairman of the Seapower and Projection Forces Subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee and is a leading voice in Congress on defense and national security related issues.

Early life, education and career

Born in Chesapeake, Virginia, Forbes graduated first in his class from Randolph-Macon College in 1974. He received his Juris Doctor from the University of Virginia School of Law in 1977. Forbes worked in private practice for Kaufman & Canoles PC.

Political career

Forbes served in the Virginia House of Delegates from 1989 to 1997 and the Virginia State Senate from 1997 to 2001. Forbes was first elected to the House in 2001 to fill a vacancy caused by the death of ten-term Democratic Congressman Norman Sisisky; defeating Democratic State Senator Louise Lucas 52-48%.  After the 4th district was reconfigured as part of redistricting, Forbes has since run unopposed by Democrats in 2002 and 2006; in 2004, he faced Jonathan R. Menefee and won with 65% of the vote. He faced Wynne LeGrow in the 2010 election, and was easily re-elected with 62% of the vote. In 2012, he defeated Chesapeake City Councilwoman Ella Ward with 57% of the vote.

Forbes was Chairman of the Republican Party of Virginia from 1996 to 2001.

U.S. House of Representatives

Elections

Committee assignments

	 Committee on Armed Services

	 Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection Forces (Chairman)

	 Subcommittee on Readiness (Ex-Chairman)

	 Committee on the Judiciary

	 Subcommittee on the Constitution

	 Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security

Memberships

	Caucuses

	 Army; Navy/Marine Corps; Coast Guard; Special Operations Force Caucuses

	 Children's Caucus

	 Congressional China Caucus

	 Congressional Modeling and Simulation Caucus

	 Congressional Prayer Caucus, founder

	 Congressional Pro-Life Caucus

	 Diabetes Caucus

	 Historic Preservation Caucus

	 House Republican Israel Caucus

	 Immigration Reform Caucus

	 International Conservation Caucus

	 Internet Caucus

	 Military Retiree-Veterans Caucus

	 Missing and Exploited Children's Caucus

	Other

	 Alzheimer's Task Force

	 Cancer Working Group

	 Chesapeake Bay Watershed Task Force

	 Judicial Activism Working Group

Political positions

Defense

Randy Forbes is the current Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee’s Seapower and Projection Forces subcommittee, which exercises oversight and legislative jurisdiction over the US Navy, US Marine Corps, Air Force bomber, refueling and lift assets, Navy Reserve equipment, and maritime programs. Before his appointment to this position in 2013, he was Chairman of the HASC Readiness subcommittee during the 112th Congress.

In 2012, Forbes organized a nationwide listening tour titled “Defending Our Defenders" which was aimed at bringing public awareness to the looming impact of sequestration on national defense. Forbes voted against the measure which threatens to dismantle the military and lead to massive civilian and military layoffs.

Forbes has been a longtime proponent for a substantially expanded U.S. Navy. He has also been critical of the Navy’s current 30 Year Shipbuilding Plan, which he believes fails to adequately invest in the ships needed to meet the service’s current minimum force structure requirements.He would outline his opposition to the shipbuilding plan in an op-ed in Politico.6 In April 2013, Forbes presented an extended argument for why the U.S. must maintain a robust Navy, in which he criticized the lack of funding that had allowed the Navy to slip below the 300-ship threshold.7

Rep. Forbes is a strong supporter of sustained U.S. engagement in the Asia Pacific. In July 2013, Forbes and three colleagues wrote a letter to National Security Advisor Susan Rice asking the White House to develop an coherent strategy document for its implementation.8For his work on behalf of the Armed Services and the men and women who wear the uniform, the Army and Navy have presented their highest civilian awards to the Congressman.

In 2013, Forbes publicly came out against military action in both Libya and Syria. In 2014, Forbes promised to promote President Obama's call for funds for action in Syria.

In 2014, Forbes voted to hollow out the military with a $1.4 billion cut to operations, maintenance, and training funds.

Veterans

Congressman Forbes’ district is home to 70,000+ veterans, who make up roughly 10% of his constituency. Forbes has been recognized year in and year out by various veteran organizations for his help to bring veterans’ needs to the forefront of public discourse. Forbes was awarded the prestigious AMVET’s Silver Helmet award in 2013, and was named “Legislator of the Year" by Virginia’s MOAA in 2012. VA claims, healthcare, education, and veteran employment are the major issues which Forbes has focused much of his time in Washington on.

China

Forbes is founder and chairman of the Congressional China Caucus which takes special interest in China’s recent rise to international prominence in both economic and military arenas. As one of Congress’ preeminent scholars on China issues, Forbes was invited to speak at Harvard in the spring of 2012 to discuss the emerging Chinese military threat and possible US responses. Congressman Forbes has been a lead voice in addressing Chinese military ambition, cyber threats, contaminated exports, human rights violations, and most recently the attempted acquisition of America’s largest pork company by a Chinese competitor.

Economy

Forbes’ economic policy is driven by the idea that fewer taxes and less regulation will lead to the success of more businesses and the creation of more jobs. Forbes has supported the delay, defunding, and full repeal of the Affordable Care Act, which he has deemed to be one of the biggest job killers in American history. Forbes’ support and efforts have helped bring companies like Sabra, Amazon, Capital One, Rolls Royce, and General Dynamics to southeastern Virginia. His efforts are also responsible for helping keep a carrier in Hampton Roads which threatened a loss of 8,200 jobs, as well as guiding Ft. lee through the latest BRAC which saw the fort expand its role and impact on the local economy. Forbes has been awarded NAM’s “Legislative Excellence Award", the NFIB’s “Guardian of Small Business" award, and the US Chamber’s “Spirit of Enterprise" award for his work to protect businesses and bring jobs to his district.

Government accountability

Forbes has introduced or cosponsored several pieces of legislation, which aim to hold government more accountable. He is one of only seventeen members of congress to vote against every federal bailout under both the Bush and Obama administrations. Though a staunch supporter of national defense, he has also called for a full audit of both the Department of Defense and Federal Reserve. Furthermore, Forbes has introduced a balanced budget amendment, and CAP Act to tie members of Congress’ salaries to spending.The revelation that the National Security Agency was abusing intelligence gathering powers provided them under the PATRIOT and FISA acts, Forbes cosponsored bipartisan legislation which enacts greater accountability and oversight over the agency’s intelligence gathering techniques.

Religious freedom

As Founder and Co-Chairman of the bicameral Congressional Prayer Caucus, Congressman Forbes, and co-chairman Senator Lankford, lead more than 90 Members of Congress in espousing the ideals of the millions of Americans who believe religion to be an essential component of the United States. Under his leadership, the Congressional Prayer Caucus has led against efforts to remove religious references from the public square, worked to promote prayer and legislation affirming faith in the foundation of America.

Energy independence

On June 12, 2008 Forbes introduced H.R. 6260, titled "New Manhattan Project for Energy Independence." The bill was offered as a substitute for the entire energy bill and outlined a series of prizes, similar to the X-PRIZE, which would be awarded to a private entity, which completed one of seven tasks related to achieving energy independence. The bill included $14 billion in prizes and $10 billion in grants ($10 billion of which would have supported nuclear fusion research); provisions to establish a summit to discuss the challenge of energy independence; and creation of a commission to offer recommendations to fulfill the goal of becoming energy independent within 20 years. On June 26, 2009, the bill was offered as an amendment in the nature of a substitute for the Waxman/Markey-sponsored American Clean Energy and Security Act. The amendment was rejected by the House of Representatives 255-172.

Homosexuality

In 2010, Forbes filed an amicus brief calling for a vote on whether gay and lesbian residents of Washington D.C. should be allowed to marry. Forbes was also a co-sponsor of HR 3829, a bill that would require the federal government to withhold marriage recognition from legally married gay and lesbian couples in certain states. Forbes has supported amending the U.S. Constitution to prevent gay and lesbian couples from marrying.

In late 2013, Congressman Forbes pressured the House GOP campaign arm to "deny support for some of the party's gay congressional candidates." Forbes voted to prevent gay and lesbian service members from serving openly in the military. He also cosponsored HR3828, which would have prevented gay and lesbian service members from marrying on Department of Defense property.

Electoral history


