
#Article: Patricia Arquette
#Type: regular article

Patricia Arquette (born April 8, 1968) is an American actress. She made her film debut in A Nightmare on Elm Street 3: Dream Warriors (1987). Her notable films include Tony Scott's True Romance (1993) as Alabama Whitman, Tim Burton's Ed Wood (1994), David O. Russell's Flirting with Disaster (1996), David Lynch's Lost Highway (1997), Stephen Frears's The Hi-Lo Country (1998), Martin Scorsese's Bringing Out the Dead (1999), and the Disney film Holes (2003) as Kissin' Kate Barlow.

For her performance in Richard Linklater's Boyhood, which was filmed from 2002 until 2014, she received widespread praise and won the Academy Award, BAFTA Award, Critics' Choice Award, Golden Globe Award, Independent Spirit Award, and SAG Award for Best Supporting Actress.

On television, she played the character Allison DuBois—based on the author and medium Allison DuBois, who claims to have psychic abilities—in the supernatural drama series Medium for seven seasons (2005-11), for which she received three Golden Globe nominations and two Emmy Award nominations, winning the Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama in 2005. Since March 2015, she has played the leading role of Special Agent Avery Ryan in the CSI spinoff series CSI: Cyber.

Early life and family

Arquette was born in Chicago, Illinois, the daughter of Lewis Arquette (1935-2001), an actor, and Brenda Olivia "Mardi" (née Nowak; 1939-1997), who was also involved in the arts and worked as a therapist. Arquette's father was a convert from Catholicism to Islam; through him, Patricia is distantly related to explorer Meriwether Lewis. Arquette's mother was Jewish (from a family that immigrated from Poland and Russia). Her paternal grandfather was comedian Cliff Arquette; and her siblings are actors Rosanna, Robert, Richmond, and David Arquette. As a child, her parents offered to get her braces for her teeth; but she refused, telling them she wanted to have flaws because it would help her with character acting. She was raised living on a commune in rural Bentonville, Virginia with her siblings, and has stated that their father was an alcoholic, and their mother violently abusive. When Arquette was seven, the family relocated to Chicago, and later settled in Los Angeles, California.

Career

Early career (1987-1996)

In 1987, Arquette's first starring roles included pregnant teenager Stacy in the television film Daddy, boarding school student Zero in Pretty Smart, and the shrill, flighty Kristen Parker in A Nightmare on Elm Street 3: Dream Warriors, alongside Robert Englund as Freddy Krueger. She was set to appear in the sequel, A Nightmare on Elm Street 4: The Dream Master, but she had to drop out due to pregnancy with her son Enzo, which also caused her to leave the role of Tralala in Last Exit to Brooklyn. In 1988, Arquette played the daughter of Tess Harper in Far North. Her roles in the early 1990s were in low budget and independent films, including Prayer of the Rollerboys (1990), The Indian Runner (1991), which was the directorial debut of Sean Penn, the drama Inside Monkey Zetterland, and in 1992, she won a CableACE Award for Best Lead Actress in a Mini-Series for her portrayal of a deaf girl with epilepsy in Wildflower, directed by Diane Keaton and also starring Reese Witherspoon. She received perhaps the most recognition in her early career for her role as Alabama Whitman, a free spirited, kind hearted prostitute in Tony Scott's True Romance (1993). The film was a moderate success, although some critics were deterred by the graphic violence. One scene in particular involves a bloodied fight, which calls on Arquette to put up a strong physical struggle which her character ultimately wins. Arquette's performance received generally unanimous praise from critics. Janet Maslin of the New York Times remarked that Arquette played her role with "surprising sweetness", while Peter Travers remarked that "Arquette delivers sensationally". TV Guide noted that the film blends and recycles elements from the story of Bonnie and Clyde and Terrence Malick's love on the run film Badlands (1973), while giving True Romance overall a favourable review for combining aforementioned earlier works with "enough energy and verve to create something entirely fresh and infectiously entertaining". Richard Corliss of Time Magazine echoed similar sentiments, also likening the film to the story of Bonnie and Clyde.

Following True Romance, Arquette appeared in the television film Betrayed by Love (1994), and the well-received biopic Ed Wood, directed by Tim Burton, where she portrayed Johnny Depp's girlfriend. Her next role was as Laura Bowman in Beyond Rangoon (1995), which drew mixed critical reviews, but was a success internationally. In France, it was the official selection at the 1995 Cannes Film Festival, where it became one of the most popular hits of the event. Despite lacklustre reviews for the film itself, Arquette's performance as an American tourist in Burma during the 8888 Uprising was regarded as one of the film's strong points. Michael Sragow, writing for The New Yorker, stated "Arquette gives the kind of mighty physical performance usually delivered by men in existential action classics like "The Wages of Fear," but she suffuses it with something all her own - she's bulletproof yet vulnerable." Hal Hinson of The Washington Post remarked that the film was "odd, brilliant in places, but frustrating all the same", further commenting that "Arquette shows real grit when the chips are down".

Arquette appeared in three films in 1996, the first being the comedy film Flirting with Disaster (1996), about a young man's cross-country pursuit to find his parents. Critical reception was largely positive, with Todd McCarthy of Variety Magazine praising the film and the authenticity of Arquette's performance, highlighting that "Arquette is very believably distracted and infuriated". Flirting with Disaster grossed $14 million at the American box office and was screened in the Un Certain Regard section at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival. Her second film of the year was the period drama The Secret Angel, an adaptation of Joseph Conrad's 1907 novel of the same name. The film received average reviews. Her final film appearance in 1996 was in Infinity, a biographical drama about the early life of physicist Richard Feynman. The film received mixed to positive reviews, although Emmanuel Levy of Variety remarked of Arquette as being "miscast", further stating that she "registers more credibly in the first part of the film, when she plays an adolescent".

Independent film work and further critical success (1997-2003)

In 1997, Arquette starred in David Lynchs neo-noir psychological thriller Lost Highway, in a dual role as Renee Madison and Alice Wakefield. The film, with its ambiguous narrative, polarised critics upon its release but established a strong cult following. Arquette played an elusive femme fatale in a critically revered performance that enabled her to draw on her sexuality more than any other previous role. Owen Gleiberman, writing for Entertainment Weekly noted that "Arquette, with her ’40s-style curves, is certainly a spellbinding temptress". Roger Ebert, of the Chicago Sun-Times, disliked the film, saying there was "no sense to be made of it" and voiced his distaste over a scene in which Arquettes character is asked to disrobe at gunpoint. Other critics were more favourable: Andy Klein of the Dallas Observer called it a "two-hour plus fever dream", Michael Sragow of The New Yorker called the film a "compelling erotic nightmare", and Edward Guthman of the San Francisco Gate wrote a glowing review praising Arquettes performance, calling it the "strongest, most memorable performance the film" and favourably comparing her double role to Kim Novaks in Vertigo (1958). That same year, Arquette appeared in Nightwatch, a horror-thriller film directed by Ole Bornedal. The film is a remake the Danish film Nattevagten (1994), which was also directed by Bornedal. Nightwatch was not a box office success and received poor reviews by critics, many of whom considered it an unnecessary, inferior retelling of the original film.

1998 saw Arquette perform in two films: Goodbye Lover, a comedic neo-noir directed by Roland Joffé and The Hi-Lo Country, a period Western directed by Stephen Frears. The former received a poor critical reception while the latter received a more appreciative response, widely cited as a "classic Western". Stephen Holden of the New York Times said, "In its best moments the movie feels like an epic hybrid of Red River and The Last Picture Show." In 1999, Arquette returned to familiar territory with the genre that began her career, in Stigmata, a horror film, in the lead role. Produced on a budget of $29 million, the film was a box office success, grossing $50,046,268. Internationally the film earned $39,400,000 for a total world wide gross $89,446,268. Critics were not as receptive of the film as audiences, with Roger Ebert remarking "possibly the funniest movie ever made about Catholicism  -  from a theological point of view." Arquette then appeared in Martin Scorseses Bringing out the Dead, based on the novel by Joe Connelly. The film united her with then-husband Nicolas Cage and received highly favourable critical reviews, but was a box office flop. Janet Maslin of the New York Times wrote that "Arquettes quietly credible performance helps center Franks experiences; one of the films most honest scenes is one in which they share an ambulance ride without sharing a word".

Her next role was in the light-hearted comedy Little Nicky (2000), alongside Adam Sandler. Despite being a box office hit, the film received negative reviews, although Roger Ebert called it Sandlers best film to date. Following this, she starred in French-American comedy drama Human Nature (2001), written by Charlie Kaufman and directed by Michel Gondry. The film was met with mixed reviews and was screened out of competition at the 2001 Cannes Film Festival. Roger Ebert, in a three-star (out of a possible four) review, lauded the films "screwball charm". The following year, she appeared in the small-scale mystery film The Badge, playing the widowed victim of a murdered transsexual. In 2003, she portrayed the controversial pornographic film star Linda Lovelace in the little known Deeper than Deep, which was followed with the more family orientated Disney produced Holes, as Kissin Kate Barlow. Based on the 1998 novel of the same title by Louis Sachar, Holes grossed $16,300,155 in its opening weekend, making #2 at the box office, behind Anger Managements second weekend. Holes would go on to gross a domestic total of $67,406,173 and an additional $4 million in international revenue, totaling $71,406,573 at the box office against a $20 million budget, making the film a moderate financial success. Arquettes next film, Tiptoes, was released straight-to-DVD in the United States, despite a screening at the Sundance Film Festival.

Medium, widespread recognition and award success with Boyhood (2005-present)

After the humdrum reception of Tiptoes, Arquette did not appear in another film until 2006's Fast Food Nation, directed by Richard Linklater. Her three-year absence was largely spent working on Boyhood, released eight years later, in July 2014. Fast Food Nation marked her second collaboration with Linklater and is based on the bestselling 2001 non-fiction book of the same name. Fast Food Nation received mixed to positive critical reviews, with some vocal admiration. Peter Travers of Rolling Stone awarded the film three out of four stars and added, "It's less an expose of junk-food culture than a human drama, sprinkled with sly, provoking wit, about how that culture defines how we live ... The film is brimming with grand ambitions but trips on many of them as some characters aren't given enough screen time to register and others vanish just when you want to learn more about them." A. O. Scott of The New York Times also gave a commendable review, writing "It's a mirror and a portrait, and a movie as necessary and nourishing as your next meal."

In January 2005, Arquette made her first transition to television with NBC's Medium. Her role as (a fictionalized version of) psychic medium Allison DuBois won her an Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in 2005, as well as nominations for a Golden Globe in 2005, 2006 and 2007, a SAG Award in 2006, 2007 and 2010, and an Emmy Award in 2007. In 2009 NBC cancelled Medium, then CBS picked the show up and it lasted another two seasons. In 2008, she provided voice work for A Single Woman, which was panned. She did not appear in another film until 2012. Girl in Progress, a drama directed by Patricia Riggen, marked her return but was met with negative reviews. In 2013, she returned to television, appearing on Boardwalk Empire as Sally Wheet. Also in 2013, Arquette filmed the true crime drama Electric Slide, which is still awaiting release.In 2014, Boyhood was released, a project that Arquette shot for 12 years beginning in 2002. The film was directed by Richard Linklater, marking his second collaboration with Arquette. In the film, she plays Olivia Evans, a single mother whose plight to raise her two children alone with the sometimes assistance of their father (played by Ethan Hawke), is explored in an epic 12 year scope. The film details the progression of her character's son, Mason, from ages 8 to 18. The film has received universal praise, with many critics calling it a "landmark film". Arquette herself received widespread acclaim for her performance. Critic Katie McDonahugh, writing for Salon, states "the role gave Arquette space to be all of these messy things at once, and her performance was a raw, gutsy meditation on those profoundly human contradictions". Margaret Pomeranz, writing for ABC Australia, called Arquette's performance "stunning" and praised the film, further remarking that "the elision from one time to another is subtle and seamless. It's just a fabulous movie experience". Arquette went on to win the Academy, BAFTA, Critics' Choice, Golden Globe, Independent Spirit, and SAG Awards for Best Supporting Actress.

In early 2015 Arquette began starring in the CBS series CSI: Cyber, a show about FBI agents who combat Internet-based crimes.

Personal life

Arquette became pregnant around the time she turned 20 with her son Enzo Rossi (born January 3, 1989), with then-boyfriend musician Paul Rossi.

In April 1995, Arquette married Nicolas Cage (with whom she would later co-star in Bringing Out the Dead in 1999). They separated after nine months, but acted as a couple in public until Cage filed for divorce in February 2000. The divorce petition was withdrawn, but Arquette filed again in November 2000.

Arquette and actor Thomas Jane became engaged in 2002 and have a daughter, Harlow Olivia Calliope Jane (born February 20, 2003). Arquette and Jane subsequently married on June 25, 2006, at the Palazzo Contarini in Venice, Italy. In January 2009, Arquette filed for divorce from Jane on the grounds of irreconcilable differences, but the couple soon reconciled and Arquette requested to abandon the divorce petition on July 9, 2009. However, on August 13, 2010, Jane's representative announced that Arquette and Jane had decided to proceed with a divorce due to "irreconcilable differences". The divorce was finalized on July 1, 2011. The pair agreed to joint custody of their child.

Charity work

After the Haiti earthquake in 2010, Arquette and childhood friend Rosetta Millington-Getty formed GiveLove, a non-profit organization supporting ecological sanitation and composting, community development projects and housing construction in Haiti. She has also worked with Eracism Foundation, Libby Ross Foundation, The Art of Elysium, and The Heart Truth.

Most recently, she made a television commercial on behalf of PETA for homeless dogs and cats.

In 1997, after her mother died of breast cancer, Arquette worked to raise awareness about the disease. She has run in the annual Race for the Cure, and in 1999 was the spokesperson for Lee National Denim Day, which raises millions of dollars for breast cancer research and education.

In April 2010, she teamed-up with welding students of the Robert Morgan Educational Center in Miami, Florida to build shelters in earthquake-ravaged Haiti from 20 used shipping containers.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations

 

See also

	 List of actors who won the Academy, BAFTA, Critics’ Choice, Golden Globe, and SAG Award for a single performance in film


