
#Article: Robert Dold
#Type: regular article

Robert James "Bob" Dold, Jr. (born June 23, 1969) is the U.S. Representative for , having served since 2015. He previously served from 2011 to 2013. He is a member of the Republican Party. Prior to his election, Dold ran his family-owned business, Rose Pest Solutions.  In 2010, Dold defeated Democratic Party nominee Dan Seals to replace Republican incumbent Mark Kirk in the U.S. House of Representatives. Dold was narrowly defeated by Democrat Brad Schneider in 2012, but regained the seat in 2014, defeating Schneider in a rematch.

Early life, education, and career

Dold was born in Evanston, Illinois, the son of Judith Gail (née Kelley) and Robert James Dold. His ancestry includes German, Swedish, Irish, Scottish, and English. He graduated from New Trier High School where he was quarterback of the football team and captain of the wrestling and lacrosse teams. He earned a BA from Denison University where he served as President of the Campus Governance Association and acted as a member of Beta Theta Pi, a law degree from Indiana University where he was selected by his classmates to give the commencement address, and an MBA from Northwestern University’s Kellogg School of Management.

Dold was an intern in the administration of Vice President Dan Quayle. He also clerked for a New York State Judge and served as an investigative counsel for the Republican-led House Government Reform and Oversight Committee.

U.S. House of Representatives

Elections

	2010

In his first radio ad of the general election campaign, Dold described himself as a small business owner, fiscal conservative and social moderate. Democratic opponent Dan Seals' campaign disputed Dold's credentials as a "social moderate" because of presumed endorsements from conservative groups that the Daily Herald pointed out Dold hadn’t actually received. Dold was endorsed by the Chicago Tribune, the US Chamber of Commerce and the Electrical Contractors' Association. Former New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani and president of Americans for Tax Reform Grover Norquist campaigned for Dold. After reporting nearly equal fund-raising for the second quarter, Dold's fund-raising outpaced Seals' in the third quarter. Dold began the final quarter with more cash on hand than Seals. At the request of the Federal Election Commission the Dold campaign amended their second quarter, 2010, filing in September, 2010 to reflect debts and expenditures that had been incurred in the second quarter but had not yet been billed when the filing period ended.

On October 7, 2010, the Chicago Tribune endorsed Dold because “he will be in the moderate, pro-choice, independent mold of Kirk.”

	2012

The National Journal's Cook Political Report named Dold one of the top 10 Republicans most vulnerable to redistricting in 2012 with the 10th becoming more Democratic following redistricting. The endorsement of Mark Kirk, who is popular in the district, was expected to help Dold. Dold had a strong cash-on-hand advantage over his opponent Brad Schneider. Dold earned the endorsement of the Chicago Tribune and Daily Herald. Schneider defeated Dold 51%-49%, a difference of just 3,000 votes.

	2014

On May 8, 2013, Dold announced in an e-mail to supporters that he would run for his old seat in 2014. He was actively recruited to run again. The race has been ranked the #7 most likely flip for 2014 House rematches. Dold won the rematch and took office at the start of the 114th Congress.

Tenure

Reputation

Dold is a moderate Republican who had a centrist voting record in Congress. The non-partisan organization GovTrack has ranked Dold in the political center of Congress. National Journal did a comprehensive study of key votes in the House, ranking Dold as one of the most independent members of Congress. Dold is an original member of the No Labels movement which, Dold stated, he hoped would help to end the gridlock in Washington, DC. While in Congress, Dold was a member of the Tuesday Group. An editorial in The Daily Herald noted Dold’s spirit of bipartisanship and called for more Bob Dolds in Congress.

Political positions

Dold supports abortion rights. In 2012, Dold introduced H.R. 5650, the Protecting Women’s Access to Health Care Act, which prevents lawmakers from blocking funds to Planned Parenthood. He has voiced support for stem cell research. In January 22 2015, Dold voted for H.R. 7 No Taxpayer Funding for Abortion Act which would permanently ban tax payer funding for abortion services and eliminate tax credits for private companies who provide their employees abortion services, in their insurance plans.

Dold voted for the fiscal cliff compromise bill, which permanently extended most of the Bush middle class tax cuts.

He has stated his support for gay marriage and immigration reform. Regarding the Affordable Care Act, he has stated his desire to improve the law rather than fight to repeal or defund it. Dold has said the Affordable Care Act was right to require insurance coverage for pre-existing conditions and to allow students to stay on a parent's insurance to age 26. Upon his return to the House in 2015, Dold became one of just three Republican Congressmen to vote against repeal of the Affordable Care Act - the first time any elected Republicans at the federal level voted against such a measure.

Dold supports gun control measures. He accepts the scientific consensus on climate change and believes steps should be taken to address the issue.

Personnel

Upon taking office in 2011, Dold hired former lobbyist Eric Burgeson, who grew up in Illinois’ 10th district, as his congressional Chief of Staff. Burgeson and Dold had previously worked together on Sen. Bob Dole's 1996 Presidential campaign.  Dold instituted a policy that "staff may not work on matters of substance with former clients."

Committee assignments

Rep. Dold was originally appointed to the Committee on Financial Services for the 114th Congress, but after the resignation of fellow Illinois Republican Aaron Schock, Dold was chosen to replace him on the powerful Ways and Means Committee.

	Committee on Ways and Means

	Subcommittee on Human Resources

	Subcommittee on Social Security

	Previous

	 Committee on Financial Services

	 Subcommittee on Capital Markets and Government-Sponsored Enterprises

	 Subcommittee on Insurance, Housing and Community Opportunity

Personal life

Dold is married and has three children. Dold resides in Kenilworth, Illinois and runs Rose Pest Solutions, the oldest pest control company in the country. Dold attends Kenilworth Union Church and is a scoutmaster for Kenilworth Boy Scout Troop #13.

In 2012, Dold purchased a home in Kenilworth, Illinois from his parents. Because of ongoing changes to the election map due to redistricting, this home is now outside the 10th Congressional District. A campaign spokesperson said “When he wins he will move into the new 10th."


