
#Article: Guillermo del Toro
#Type: regular article

Guillermo del Toro Gómez (; born October 9, 1964) is a Mexican film director, screenwriter, producer, and novelist. In his filmmaking career, del Toro has alternated between Spanish-language dark fantasy pieces, such as the gothic horror film The Devil's Backbone (2001), and Pan's Labyrinth (2006), and more mainstream American action movies, such as the vampire superhero action film Blade II (2002), the supernatural superhero film Hellboy (2004), its sequel Hellboy II: The Golden Army (2008), and the science fiction monster film Pacific Rim (2013).

In addition to his directing works, del Toro is a prolific producer, his producing works including acclaimed and/or successful films such as The Orphanage (2007), Julia's Eyes (2010), Biutiful (2010), Kung Fu Panda 2 (2011), Puss in Boots (2011), and Mama (2013). He was originally chosen by Peter Jackson to direct The Hobbit films; he left the project due to production problems but was still credited as co-writer for his numerous contributions to the script.

Del Toro's work is characterised by a strong connection to fairy tales and horror, with an effort to infuse visual or poetic beauty. He has a lifelong fascination with monsters, which he considers symbols of great power. Del Toro is known for his use of insectile and religious imagery, the themes of Catholicism and celebrating imperfection, underworld and clockwork motifs, practical special effects, dominant amber lighting, and his frequent collaborations with actors Ron Perlman and Doug Jones.

Early life

Del Toro was born in Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. He was raised in a strict Catholic household. Del Toro studied at the Centro de Investigación y Estudios Cinematográficos, in Guadalajara.

When del Toro was about eight years old, he began experimenting with his father's Super 8 camera, making short films with Planet of the Apes toys and other objects. One short focused on a "serial killer potato" with ambitions of world domination; it murdered del Toro's mother and brothers before stepping outside and being crushed by a car. Del Toro made about 10 short films before his first feature, including one titled Matilde, but only the last two, Doña Lupe and Geometria, have been made available. He also wrote four and directed five episodes of the cult series La Hora Marcada, along with other Mexican filmmakers such as Emmanuel Lubezki and Alfonso Cuarón.

Del Toro studied special effects and make-up with special-effects artist Dick Smith. He spent 10 years as a special-effects make-up designer and formed his own company, Necropia. He also co-founded the Guadalajara International Film Festival. Later in his directing career, he formed his own production company, the Tequila Gang.

In 1997, at the age of 33, Guillermo was given a $30 million budget from Miramax Films to shoot another film, Mimic. During this time, his father, automotive entrepreneur Federico del Toro, was kidnapped in Guadalajara. Although Federico was eventually released safely, due to intense economic pressure from his captors, del Toro's family had to pay twice the amount originally asked. The event prompted del Toro, his parents, and his siblings to move abroad. In an interview with Time magazine, he said this about the kidnapping of his father: "Every day, every week, something happens that reminds me that I am in involuntary exile my country."

Career

 I cannot pontificate about it, but by the time I'm done, I will have done one movie, and it's all the movies I want.People say, you know, "I like your Spanish movies more than I like your English-language movies because they are not as personal", and I go "Fuck, you're wrong!" Hellboy is as personal to me as Pan's Labyrinth. They're tonally different, and yes, of course you can like one more than the other - the other one may seem banal or whatever it is that you don't like. But it really is part of the same movie. You make one movie.Hitchcock did one movie, all his life. —Guillermo del Toro, Twitch Film, January 15, 2013 

Del Toro has directed a wide variety of films, from comic book adaptations (Blade II, Hellboy) to historical fantasy and horror films, two of which are set in Spain in the context of the Spanish Civil War under the authoritarian rule of Francisco Franco. These two films, The Devil's Backbone and Pan's Labyrinth, are among his most critically acclaimed works. They share similar settings, protagonists and themes with the 1973 Spanish film The Spirit of the Beehive, widely considered to be the finest Spanish film of the 1970s.

Del Toro views the horror genre as inherently political, explaining, "Much like fairy tales, there are two facets of horror. One is pro-institution, which is the most reprehensible type of fairy tale: Don't wander into the woods, and always obey your parents. The other type of fairy tale is completely anarchic and antiestablishment."

He is close friends with two other prominent and critically praised Mexican filmmakers Alfonso Cuarón and Alejandro González Iñárritu. The three often influence each other's directorial decisions, and have been interviewed together by Charlie Rose. Cuarón was one of the producers of Pan's Labyrinth, while Iñárritu assisted in editing the film.

Del Toro has also contributed to the web series Trailers From Hell.

In April 2008, del Toro was hired by Peter Jackson to direct the live-action film adaptation of J. R. R. Tolkien's The Hobbit. On May 30, 2010, del Toro left the project due to extended delays brought on by MGM's financial troubles. Although he did not direct the films, he is credited as co-writer in An Unexpected Journey, The Desolation of Smaug and The Battle of the Five Armies.

On June 2, 2009, del Toro's first novel, The Strain, was released. It is the first part of an apocalyptic vampire trilogy co-authored by del Toro and Chuck Hogan. The second volume, The Fall, was released on September 21, 2010. The final installment, The Night Eternal, followed in October 2011. Del Toro cites writings of Antoine Augustin Calmet, Montague Summers and Bernhardt J. Hurwood among his favourites in the non-literary form about vampires.

On December 9, 2010, del Toro launched Mirada Studios with his long-time cinematographer Guillermo Navarro, director Mathew Cullen and executive producer Javier Jimenez. Mirada was formed in Los Angeles, California to be a collaborative space where they and other filmmakers can work with Mirada's artists to create and produce projects that span digital production and content for film, television, advertising, interactive and other media. Mirada launched as a sister company to production company Motion Theory.

Del Toro directed Pacific Rim, a science fiction film based on a screenplay by del Toro and Travis Beacham. In the film, giant monsters rise from the Pacific Ocean and attack major cities, leading humans to retaliate with gigantic mecha suits called Jaegers. Del Toro commented, "This is my most un-modest film, this has everything. The scale is enormous and I'm just a big kid having fun." The film was released on July 12, 2013 and grossed $411 million at the box office.

Del Toro directed "Night Zero", the pilot episode of The Strain, a vampire horror television series based on the novel trilogy of the same name by del Toro and Chuck Hogan. FX has commissioned the pilot episode, which del Toro scripted with Hogan and was filmed in Toronto in September 2013. FX ordered a thirteen-episode first season for the series on November 19, 2013, and announced that the series will premiere some time in July 2014.

After The Strains pilot episode, del Toro directed Crimson Peak, a gothic horror film he co-wrote with Matthew Robbins and Lucinda Cox. Del Toro has described the film as "a very set-oriented, classical but at the same time modern take on the ghost story", citing The Omen, The Exorcist and The Shining as influences. Del Toro also stated, "I think people are getting used to horror subjects done as found footage or B-value budgets. I wanted this to feel like a throwback." Jessica Chastain, Tom Hiddleston, Mia Wasikowska, and Charlie Hunnam starred in the film. Production began February 2014 in Toronto, with an April 2015 release date initially planned. The studio later pushed the date back to October 2015, to coincide with the Halloween season.

He was selected to be on the jury for the main competition section of the 2015 Cannes Film Festival.

Future projects

Del Toro is scheduled to direct three films for Universal: Frankenstein; a new adaptation of Slaughterhouse-Five; and Drood, a film based on a Dan Simmons novel published in February 2009. Drood was expected to be his first project after the two films set in Middle-earth. These projects would have filled up his schedule until 2017. Part of the Universal deal entails continuing research and development for the creatures in At the Mountains of Madness. In June 2009, Del Toro said he would only direct Frankenstein. Del Toro is also in the early stages of development of Saturn and the End of Days.

Del Toro said his Frankenstein would be a faithful "Miltonian tragedy", citing Frank Darabont's "near perfect" script, which evolved into Kenneth Branagh's Frankenstein. Del Toro said of his vision, "What I'm trying to do is take the myth and do something with it, but combining elements of Frankenstein and Bride of Frankenstein without making it just a classical myth of the monster. The best moments in my mind of Frankenstein, of the novel, are yet to be filmed ... The only guy that has ever nailed for me the emptiness, not the tragic, not the Miltonian dimension of the monster, but the emptiness is Christopher Lee in the Hammer films, where he really looks like something obscenely alive. Boris Karloff has the tragedy element nailed down but there are so many versions, including that great screenplay by Frank Darabont that was ultimately not really filmed." He has also cited Bernie Wrightson's illustrations as inspiration, and said the film will not focus on the monster's creation, but be an adventure film featuring the character. Del Toro said he would like Wrightson to design his version of the creature. The film will also focus on the religious aspects of Shelley's tale. In June 2009, del Toro stated that production on Frankenstein was not likely to begin for at least four years.  Despite this, he has already cast frequent collaborator Doug Jones in the role of Frankenstein's monster. In an interview with Sci Fi Wire, Jones stated that he learned of the news the same day as everybody else; that "Guillermo did say to the press that he’s already cast me as his monster, but we’ve yet to talk about it. But in his mind, if that’s what he’s decided, then it's done ... It would be a dream come true."  The film will be a period piece.

In 2008, del Toro announced a stop-motion film based on the Italian novel The Adventures of Pinocchio, co-directed by Adam Parrish King, with Jim Henson Company as production company, and music by Nick Cave. It was in production for three years, and is now in development hell. The pre-production was begun by the studio ShadowMachine.

In June 2010, news came that del Toro would be writing and producing a brand new take on the story of Van Helsing. There is no word yet on if he will direct or not.

At Comic-Con 2010, del Toro made the surprise announcement that he would co-write, produce, and likely direct a 3D Haunted Mansion film for Disney. Del Toro says the film will stray away from the comedic nature of the 2003 film and will revolve around the ride's Hatbox Ghost.

On July 28, 2010, it was announced that he would direct At the Mountains of Madness by H. P. Lovecraft for Universal Pictures, with James Cameron as producer. The movie was originally set up as a project at DreamWorks in 2004. Just a month earlier, del Toro said that the Lovecraft adaptation probably wouldn't happen at all; "It doesn't look like I can do it. It's very difficult for the studios to take the step of doing a period-set, R-rated, tentpole movie with a tough ending and no love story. Lovecraft has a readership as big as any best-seller, but it's tough to quantify because his works are in the public domain." Not long after, he was approached by Cameron who asked him if he still wanted to do the movie. When del Toro confirmed he did, Cameron said “Let’s do it.” Both of them put forward the idea for Universal, which then greenlit it. Earlier the same year, del Toro also asked S. T. Joshi if he wanted to be a consultant if and when the movie got into motion.

Del Toro is also attached to produce the film adaptation of David Moody's novel Hater.

Del Toro has expressed interest in video games, and hopes to create a "Citizen Kane of games." In an MTV News interview in late July 2010, he clarified his ambitions, stating that: "One of the things we're announcing in the next few weeks is a big deal with a big company. We're going to do games that are going to be technically and narratively very interesting. It's not a development deal. We're going to do it. We're doing them. And we're going to announce it soon enough." At the 2010 Spike Video Game Awards, del Toro announced that he was working on a video game titled Insane, which was planned for release in 2013. On August 6, 2012, it was announced that the project was cancelled, although in November 2012 del Toro said that the game was still in development, with a developer and publisher that are currently unknown.

On September 21, 2010, del Toro announced that he wanted to direct new adaptations of the Stephen King novels It and Pet Sematary, but stated that he is very busy and unlikely to be able to make the films any time soon.

On August 18, 2011 it was announced del Toro is going to be developing a new film version of Beauty and the Beast, with Emma Watson in mind to star. Crazy, Stupid, Love producer Denise Di Novi confirmed the filmmaker’s involvement, and said that she would be co-producing the movie with him.

With Daniel Kraus, del Toro has written the upcoming book Trollhunters.

On January 15, 2013 del Toro confirmed that a film based around supernatural characters from DC Comics was being written. While Warner Brothers is still considering green lighting the film, del Toro stated that the working title is Dark Universe and will include characters such as John Constantine, Swamp Thing, The Spectre, and others. In November 2014, del Toro confirmed that the script was complete and handed it in to Warner Bros. to be reviewed. In December 2014, Toro revealed that the film would be a part of the DC Extended Universe.

On April 24, 2013, it was announced that del Toro is currently collaborating with HBO to create a live-action pilot based on the Naoki Urasawa manga series Monster. Toro will also produce the thriller Midnight Delivery for Universal; Brian Kirk will direct the film. In July 2013 Kevin Costner was in talks to star in the film. 

Shortly after Cronos, del Toro wrote an adaption of the novel Spanky by Christopher Fowler, called Mephisto's Bridge. 

In 2014, del Toro announced a Pacific Rim sequel and an animated series for 2017.

On August 12, 2014, it was revealed that del Toro was set to collaborate with acclaimed game director Hideo Kojima on the PlayStation 4 video game Silent Hills. However, in April 2015, del Toro announced that he would no longer be collaborating with Kojima, as the project was canceled. Three months later, del Toro announced via Twitter that the two were still working on a project together, though it is not Silent Hills. In an interview with Shacknews, Del Toro expressed that he would never again get involved in video games after his past experiences, which he quotes; “I have proven to be the albatross of video games. I joined THQ, and THQ goes broke. I join Kojima, and Kojima leaves Konami, because Metal Gear. I have decided, in order not to destroy anyone else’s life, I have decided I will never again get involved in video games. Otherwise, I’ll join someone and his house will explode, or something".

Personal life

He is married to Lorenza Newton, cousin of Mexican singer Guadalupe Pineda. He started dating Lorenza when both were studying at the Guadalajara School of Sciences. He currently lives in Agoura Hills, California with his wife and two daughters Mariana and Marisa. In addition to the home in which he lives with his family, he owns a separate house exclusively to house his books, poster artwork and other belongings pertaining to his work, explaining, "As a kid, I dreamed of having a house with secret passages and a room where it rained 24 hours a day. The point of being over 40 is to fulfill the desires you've been harboring since you were 7."

In a 2007 interview, del Toro described his political position as "a little too liberal." He pointed out that the villains in most of his films, such as the industrialist in Cronos, the Nazis in Hellboy, and the Francoists in Pan's Labyrinth, are united by the common attribute of authoritarianism. "I hate structure. I'm completely anti-structural in terms of believing in institutions. I hate them. I hate any institutionalised social, religious, or economic holding."

In 2009, in an interview with Charlie Rose, del Toro described his Roman Catholic upbringing as excessively "morbid," saying, "I mercifully lapsed as a Catholic, I say, but as Buñuel used to say, 'I'm an atheist, thank God.'" Though insisting that he is spiritually "not with Buñuel" and that "once a Catholic, always a Catholic, in a way," he followed by saying, "I believe in man. I believe in mankind, as the worst and the best that has happened to this world." He has also responded to the observation that he views his art as his religion by saying, "It is. To me, art and storytelling serve primal, spiritual functions in my daily life. Whether I'm telling a bedtime story to my kids or trying to mount a movie or write a short story or a novel, I take it very seriously."

In 2010, del Toro revealed that he was a fan of video games, describing them as "the comic books of our time" and "a medium that gains no respect among the intelligentsia." He has stated that the only games he considers masterpieces are Ico and Shadow of the Colossus.

Del Toro's favorite film monsters are Frankenstein's monster, the Alien, Gill-man, Godzilla, and the Thing. Frankenstein in particular has a special meaning for him, in both film and literature, as he claims he has a "Frankenstein fetish to a degree that is unhealthy," and that it's "the most important book of my life, so you know if I get to it, whenever I get to it, it will be the right way."

In an interview with Robert K. Elder for his book The Best Film You've Never Seen, del Toro explains his careful methodology: “I’m as thorough and as well-prepared as I can be in my filmmaking, and that came from the discipline of having to work as a make-up effects artist many, many, many times in my life.”

Recurring collaborators

	Screenwriter

	 Matthew Robbins (Mimic, Don't Be Afraid of the Dark, Crimson Peak)

	Producers

	 Bertha Navarro (Cronos, Under a Spell, The Devil's Backbone, I Murder Seriously, Chronicles, Pan's Labyrinth, Insignificant Things, Rage)

	 Alfonso Cuarón (Chronicles, Pan's Labyrinth)

	 Lawrence Gordon, Lloyd Levin and Mike Richardson (Hellboy, Hellboy II: The Golden Army)

	 Jon Jashni and Thomas Tull (Pacific Rim, Crimson Peak)

	Cinematographers

	 Guillermo Navarro (Cronos, The Devil's Backbone, Hellboy, Pan's Labyrinth, Hellboy II: The Golden Army, Pacific Rim)

	 Dan Laustsen (Mimic, Crimson Peak)

	 Gabriel Beristain (Blade II, The Strain)

	Composers

	 Javier Navarrete (The Devil's Backbone, Pan's Labyrinth)

	 Marco Beltrami (Mimic, Blade II, Hellboy, Don't Be Afraid of the Dark)

	 Fernando Velázquez (The Orphanage, Julia's Eyes, Mama, Crimson Peak)

	 Ramin Djawadi (Pacific Rim, The Strain)

	Actors

	 Federico Luppi (Cronos, The Devil's Backbone, Pan's Labyrinth)

	 Ron Perlman (Cronos, Blade II, Hellboy, Hellboy II: The Golden Army, Pacific Rim, Book of Life)

	 Norman Reedus (Mimic, Blade II, Silent Hills)

	 Doug Jones (Mimic, Hellboy, Pan's Labyrinth, Hellboy II: The Golden Army, The Strain, Crimson Peak)

	 Fernando Tielve (The Devil's Backbone, Pan's Labyrinth)

	 Íñigo Garcés (The Devil's Backbone, Pan's Labyrinth)

	 Luke Goss (Blade II, Hellboy II: The Golden Army)

	 Karel Roden (Blade II, Hellboy)

	 Santiago Segura (Blade II, Hellboy, Hellboy II: The Golden Army, Pacific Rim)

	 Ladislav Beran (Blade II, Hellboy)

	 John Hurt (Hellboy, Hellboy II: The Golden Army, The Strain)

	 Belén Rueda (The Orphanage, Julia's Eyes)

	 Diego Luna (Rudo y Cursi, Book of Life)

	 Jessica Chastain (Mama, Crimson Peak)

	 Javier Botet (Mama, The Strain, Crimson Peak)

	 Charlie Hunnam (Pacific Rim, Crimson Peak)

	 Burn Gorman (Pacific Rim, Crimson Peak)

	 Robert Maillet (Pacific Rim, The Strain)

	 Leslie Hope (The Strain, Crimson Peak)

	 Jonathan Hyde (The Strain, Crimson Peak)

Filmography

Awards and nominations

See also

	 Cha Cha Cha Films

	 Cinema of Mexico

	 Mirada Studios


