
#Article: Michael Weatherly
#Type: regular article

Michael Manning Weatherly, Jr., (born July 8 1968) an American actor, writer, singer and director, has gained international recognition and fame for his role as NCIS Special Agent Anthony DiNozzo on the television series NCIS, a spin-off of JAG, a role he has played since 2003. Hes also known for his role as Logan Cale on the television series Dark Angel from 2000-2002.

Early life

Weatherly was born in New York City on July 8, 1968, and raised in Fairfield, Connecticut, by parents Patricia O'Hara (née Hetherington) and Michael Manning Weatherly, Sr. Weatherly is of partly Irish descent.

Weatherly attended Fairfield Country Day School and graduated from Brooks School in North Andover, Massachusetts. Weatherly attended Boston College, Menlo College and American University, but he left college to pursue acting.

Weatherly is very passionate about music and plays several instruments, including piano and guitar. He has contributed two songs to the NCIS soundtracks, Bitter and Blue and Under the Sun, and played in a band while pursuing his early career in New York City. Another early project was a video shot for a Karaoke CD: A Taste Of Honey's version of "Sukiyaki".  

Career

Weatherly began his acting career with a minor television role on The Cosby Show as Theo Huxtable's roommate. He was later cast in the role of Cooper Alden on Loving and later, The City. He appeared in the role from 1992 until 1996.

Weatherly later moved to Los Angeles, soon landing a role as a series regular on the FOX television series Significant Others, with Jennifer Garner. The show only lasted six episodes. He then met director Whit Stillman, who cast him in the 1998 film The Last Days of Disco as Hap opposite Chloë Sevigny. Weatherly also appeared as a conflicted Warlock in the series Charmed during its first season in 1998.

His movie credits include Meet Wally Sparks with Rodney Dangerfield, Gun Shy with Liam Neeson, Cabin by the Lake, and the independent film Trigger Happy opposite Rosario Dawson.

Michael Weatherly starred in Dark Angel for the two seasons it was on the air. This role earned him three award nominations, two Saturn Awards for Best supporting actor on Television in 2001 and 2002, and one Teen Choice award for choice actor in 2001. During filming, Weatherly began a relationship with co-star Jessica Alba, leading to their engagement in 2001. The relationship ended in August 2003.

In 2003, he appeared as Senior NCIS Special Agent Anthony DiNozzo in two episodes of the CBS series JAG, a role he continued to portray in the spin-off series NCIS; making subsequent guest appearances on both NCIS: New Orleans (2014) and NCIS: Los Angeles (2015) being one of only two actors to appear in all 4 series (JAG, NCIS, NCIS: LA, NCIS: NO) the other being Pauley Perrette who plays Abby Sciuto. In 2004 he starred in the television film The Mystery of Natalie Wood, portraying Robert Wagner. Since 2010, Robert Wagner has made five guest appearances on NCIS as Anthony DiNozzo, Sr., the father of Michael's character, Tony DiNozzo.

He was a guest presenter at the Australian Logie Awards of 2007 on 6 May 2007 and was a guest on Rove Live.

Weatherly made his directing debut with the Season 8 episode of NCIS titled "One Last Score", which aired March 1, 2011 and also directed the NCIS Season 10 episode, "Seek" which aired March 19th, 2013.

He portrayed Jesus Christ in a YouTube video which also featured comedian Sarah Silverman, that was sponsored by a pro-choice organization.

Personal life

Weatherly married his Loving/The City co-star Amelia Heinle in February 1995. Heinle had one son with Weatherly. The couple divorced in 1997.

In 2001, Weatherly became engaged to his Dark Angel co-star Jessica Alba, but the couple ended their engagement in August 2003.

Weatherly married internist Bojana Janković on September 30, 2009. The couple live in Los Angeles with their two children, a daughter and a son.

Weatherly is the uncle of actress Alexandra Breckenridge.

Weatherly shares his birthday with fellow NCIS co-star Rocky Carroll.

During November 2015, Weatherly was arrested and charged with driving under the influence after he was pulled over for speeding and spent 15 hours in jail.

Filmography

  

Awards and nominations

Saturn Awards

	2001: Nominated, "Best Supporting Actor in a Television Series" - Dark Angel

	2002: Nominated, "Best Supporting Actor in a Television Series" - Dark Angel

Soap Opera Digest Awards

	1994: Nominated, "Hottest Male Star" - Loving

	1995: Nominated, "Outstanding Younger Lead Actor" - Loving

Teen Choice Awards

	2001: Nominated, "Choice TV Actor" - Dark Angel


