
#Article: Savannah Guthrie
#Type: regular article

Savannah Clark Guthrie (born December 27, 1971) is an American journalist and attorney, working for NBC News. She has been co-anchor of The Today Show since June 2012.

Guthrie joined NBC News in September 2007 as a legal analyst and correspondent, regularly reporting on trials throughout the country. After serving as a White House correspondent between 2008 and 2011 and as co-anchor of the MSNBC program The Daily Rundown in 2010 and 2011, Guthrie was announced as the co-host of Todays third hour alongside Natalie Morales and Al Roker. In that role, she substituted as news anchor and main co-host and appeared as the chief legal analyst across all NBC platforms. Guthrie ceased to be the third hour co-host and chief legal analyst in 2012 when she replaced Ann Curry as co-anchor of Today.

Early life

Savannah Clark Guthrie, named for her great-grandmother, was born in Melbourne, Australia, where her father was stationed for work. Her family returned to the United States and moved to Tucson, Arizona two years later. She graduated from Amphitheater High School in Tucson.

Guthrie received her undergraduate degree in journalism from the University of Arizona, graduating Cum laude in 1993. She was a member of the Arizona Alpha chapter of Pi Beta Phi.

Career

Her first job in broadcasting was at ABC affiliate KMIZ, in Columbia, Missouri, where she worked for two years before returning to Tucson and a job with NBC affiliate KVOA in 1995. After five years in Arizona, she took a job at WRC-TV, Washington, D.C. where she covered major stories including the September 11, 2001, attack on The Pentagon and the 2001 anthrax attacks.

After working several years as a broadcast journalist, Guthrie chose to resume her higher education, receiving a Juris Doctor from Georgetown University Law Center, where she graduated Magna Cum Laude in 2002. She is a member of the bars of the District of Columbia and Arizona, having scored first place on the Arizona Bar Exam. She also was a member of Order of the Coif and received the International Academy of Trial Lawyers' Student Advocacy award for her work with victims of domestic violence.

She worked for the law firm Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld, where she served as a litigation associate, specializing in white-collar criminal defense. In 2004, she became a national trial correspondent for CourtTV. She covered high-profile legal proceedings including the Senate Judiciary Committee confirmation hearings of U.S. Supreme Court nominee Samuel Alito, the abduction and murder trial of Carlie Brucia, the Martha Stewart case, and the Michael Jackson trial.

NBC News

Guthrie became a correspondent for NBC News in September 2007. She covered Sarah Palin's 2008 vice-presidential race from Fairbanks, Pittsburgh, San Antonio, Sioux City, Iowa, and Washington. On December 18, she was named White House correspondent for NBC News. In this capacity, she contributed to all NBC News properties.Guthrie is also an NBC News anchor and substitute anchor on NBC Nightly News.

The Today Show

After Guthrie substituted for both Meredith Vieira and Ann Curry on Today, it was confirmed on May 9, 2011 that she would become co-host of the 9 a.m. hour, alongside Natalie Morales and Al Roker, and the show's Chief Legal Editor. The move came after Vieira announced her departure from the show as co-host of the main program, and the subsequent promotions of Curry and Morales to main co-host and news anchor, respectively. Guthrie departed The Daily Rundown for Today on June 8, 2012. She also became NBC News's Chief Legal Analyst, making her first appearance in this role on May 25, 2011.On June 29, 2012, it was announced that Guthrie would co-anchor Today, replacing Curry. Her first day as co-anchor, alongside Matt Lauer, was on July 9, 2012.

Other work

Guthrie appeared as herself in the 2015 film Sharknado 3: Oh Hell No!.

Personal life

While covering the trial of Michael Jackson, Guthrie met English-born BBC News presenter Mark Orchard. After Orchard divorced his first wife, journalist Anne Kornblut, the couple married in December 2005. Guthrie and Orchard divorced in 2009, and later that year she began a relationship with Democratic political and communications consultant Michael Feldman. They became engaged in May 2013 while vacationing on Turks and Caicos. They married on March 15, 2014 in Tucson, with Guthrie announcing two days later she was four months pregnant. Guthrie lives in the SoHo neighborhood of Lower Manhattan. On August 13, 2014, Guthrie gave birth to daughter Vale Guthrie Feldman in a New York City hospital. The baby weighed in at 8 lb 5 oz (3.77 kg) and was 19.5 in long. It is the couple's first child together. Ms. Guthrie has spoken of the importance to her in raising her daughter and in "making sure that Vale grows up knowing about God and Jesus and faith is, I think, one of my most important responsibilities."


