
#Article: Elizabeth Mitchell
#Type: regular article

Elizabeth Mitchell (born March 27, 1970) is an American actress. She is best known for her role as Dr. Juliet Burke on the ABC TV series Lost, and also had lead roles on the TV series V and Revolution, and recurred as the Snow Queen in Once Upon A Time in late 2014. She has starred in such films as The Santa Clause 2 & 3 and Gia.

Early life

Mitchell was born in Los Angeles, California. Her stepfather, Joseph Day Mitchell, and mother, Josephine Marian Mitchell (née Jenkins), are lawyers based in Dallas. Mitchell and her mother moved to Dallas, Texas in 1970, where her mother married Joseph Mitchell in 1975. Mitchell graduated from Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, a public magnet school. She is the eldest of three sisters, the others being Kristina Helen "Kristie" Mitchell (b. 1977), and Katherine Day "Kate" Mitchell (b. 1981).

She attended Stephens College, graduating in 1991 with a Bachelor of Fine Arts in acting, and then studied at the British American Drama Academy.

Career

Mitchell worked for six years in Dallas Theater Center and a year at Encore Theater.

Mitchell had a recurring role as psychiatrist Dr. Kim Legaspi, the first lesbian lover of Dr. Kerry Weaver (Laura Innes) during the 2000-01 season of TV series ER. She also played Angelina Jolie's hairdresser/lover in the movie Gia. She also had a one episode role in House M.D. as a patient. In March 2009, Mitchell was cast in the ABC series V, a remake of the classic science fiction television miniseries. Although ABC and Warner Bros. officials told the magazine she was only cast as a guest star, the announcement led to speculation and concern that Mitchell's character would be killed off at the end of Losts fifth season, which ended on a cliffhanger that left the fate of her character unknown. Mitchell was later named the lead actress on V. Mitchell's character was killed off in the premiere of the sixth (and final) season of Lost, but returned for the two-part series finale.

V lasted for one more season, which premiered on January 4, 2011. Mitchell had a guest starring role on Law & Order: Special Victims Unit in 2011 where she played June Frye. Mitchell starred in the film, Answers to Nothing in 2011, where she played Kate. In 2012, she joined the cast of the series Revolution as Rachel Matheson, replacing actress Andrea Roth, whom Mitchell had worked with for one episode on Lost. The series premiered on September 17, 2012.

Awards and honors

For her appearance on the series finale of Lost, Mitchell was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series in 2010.

Personal life

In an interview with Aventura magazine, Mitchell claimed she was just "a dorky kid" when she left Los Angeles for Dallas: "I would finish school in Dallas where my mom was going to law school, and she would make sure I got right over to the Theater Center," says Mitchell. "It was magic. I loved every second of being there and wanted to sleep on stage. I knew then I wanted to be an actress." 

Mitchell married actor Chris Soldevilla in 2004, with whom she has a son named C.J., who was born in 2005. In 2013 Mitchell and Soldevilla divorced due to irreconcilable differences.

She shares the same birth name as actress Elizabeth Banks, who changed her name to avoid confusion with Elizabeth Mitchell.

Filmography

Film

Television

Theater

Awards and nominations

	 A^ Tied with Summer Glau.


