
#Article: Julianna Margulies
#Type: regular article

Julianna Luisa Margulies  (born June 8, 1966) is an American actress and producer.

After several small television roles, Margulies achieved both critical and commercial success in her role as Nurse Carol Hathaway on NBC's long-running medical drama ER, for which she won an Emmy Award. After her departure from ER in 2000, Margulies appeared in the 2001 miniseries The Mists of Avalon and voiced Neera in Disney's CGI film Dinosaur. In 2009, she took the lead role of Alicia Florrick in the American legal drama The Good Wife on CBS, for which she has won a Golden Globe, a Television Critics Association Award, and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series in both 2011 and 2014.

Margulies has won eight Screen Actor Guild Awards, which has made her the most awarded woman within SAG.

In 2015, Time featured her as one of the "100 Most Influential People in the World". She was also awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

Early life

Margulies, the youngest of three daughters. was born in Spring Valley, New York. Her mother, Francesca (née Gardner), was a ballet dancer and eurythmy teacher, and her father, Paul Margulies, was a writer, philosopher, and well-known Madison Avenue advertising executive. Her parents were Jewish, descended from immigrants from Austria, Hungary, and Romania. Margulies' mother converted to Christianity during Margulies's childhood; Margulies herself still identifies as Jewish. The Margulies family lived in Israel for a period of time before Julianna's birth, then moved back to the Upper West Side of New York City.

Margulies attended grade school at Green Meadow Waldorf School and high school at High Mowing School. As a child, she lived in New York, France, and England. Margulies obtained a BA from Sarah Lawrence College, where she appeared in several campus plays.

Career

Margulies made her feature film debut as a prostitute looking to go straight in Steven Seagals film Out for Justice. In 1994, Margulies was cast in the pilot episode of the NBC medical drama ER as Carol Hathaway, an emergency care nurse who, despondent over her relationship with pediatrician Doug Ross (George Clooney), attempted suicide. Her character was originally intended to die; however, the producers changed the plot and she remained on the show for six seasons until 2000. She won an Emmy Award for Best Supporting Actress in a Television Drama in 1994, and was nominated for this award every year during her tenure. She was the only series regular cast member to win an Emmy Award.

After leaving the series, Margulies worked on stage and screen. On stage, she appeared in a MCC Theater production of Kate Robins Intrigue With Faye, a Lincoln Center production of Jon Robin Baitzs Ten Unknowns, and The Vagina Monologues. Her film work after ER included Evelyn with Pierce Brosnan and Ghost Ship with Gabriel Byrne and Ron Eldard. She starred as the protagonist and narrator (Morgaine) in the 2001 TNT miniseries The Mists of Avalon and participated in the 2002 documentary film Searching for Debra Winger. In 2004, she guest-starred in a two-episode arc in season 4 of the hit TV show Scrubs as Neena Broderick, an unscrupulous lawyer who sues Turk and has a brief sexual relationship with J.D. She starred in another miniseries on TNT, The Grid, in 2004. In April 2006, she appeared in four episodes of the sixth season of The Sopranos, portraying realtor Julianna Skiff. In August 2006, she appeared in Snakes on a Plane as flight attendant Claire Miller. In December 2006, she played Jennifer Bloom in the Sci Fi Channel miniseries The Lost Room.

In an August 2006 interview with tvguide.com, Margulies said that she was close to accepting an offer to return to ER for a four-episode arc with Noah Wyle that filmed in Hawaii during the 2005/06 season. However, she decided against it at the last minute. Margulies was again invited to return during ERs final season, but the actress initially turned down the offer, saying that she felt like she left Carol Hathaway in the perfect place and could not imagine bettering her departure episode. Later, however, Margulies did return to ER for one episode during its 15th and final season.

She had a minor role in 2007s The Darwin Awards. In 2008, Margulies starred in the legal series Canterburys Law, a Fox mid-season replacement show. She played the title character, Elizabeth Canterbury, a lawyer described as "a tough-minded defense attorney who isnt afraid to push boundaries in order to protect innocent clients." She was also credited as a producer of the show. The series was severely impacted by the 2007-2008 Writers Guild of America strike and cancelled by the network after only six episodes.

In 2009, Margulies began starring in the CBS legal drama The Good Wife. She plays Alicia Florrick, an attorney returning to legal practice after her husband Peter Florrick (played by Chris Noth) resigned as Illinois States Attorney amidst a sex and corruption scandal.

Since 2011, starting with the third season, Margulies has been credited as a producer of The Good Wife.In 2013, the actress did the voice-over for a Chase "Blue Sapphire" Credit Card commercial.In 2014, Margulies narrated "Women in Business", an episode of season 2 of Makers: Women Who Make America.

Personal life

Margulies and actor Ron Eldard, whom she met in an acting class in 1991, dated for twelve years before splitting in 2003. Margulies and attorney Keith Lieberthal, the son of academic Kenneth Lieberthal, were married on November 10, 2007 in Lenox, Massachusetts. They have one child, a son named Kieran, and reside in Manhattan, New York City.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations

See also

	 List of actors who won the Critics’ Choice, Golden Globe, Primetime Emmy, SAG, and TCA Award for a single performance in television


