
#Article: Emily Mortimer
#Type: regular article

Emily Kathleen Anne Mortimer (born 1 December 1971) is an English actress and screenwriter. She began acting in stage productions, and has since appeared in several film and television roles. In 2003, she won an Independent Spirit Award for her performance in Lovely and Amazing. She is also known for playing roles in Lars and the Real Girl (2007), Harry Brown (2009), Shutter Island (2010), and Hugo (2011).

Early life and education

Mortimer was born in Hammersmith, London, England, to Sir John Mortimer, QC (a lawyer and writer who created the TV series Rumpole of the Bailey), and his second wife, Penelope (née Gollop). She has a younger sister, Rosie; two older half-siblings, Sally Silverman and Jeremy, by her father's first marriage, to author Penelope Fletcher; and a half-brother, Ross Bentley, by her father's affair with actress Wendy Craig.

Mortimer studied at St Paul's Girls' School in west London, where she appeared in several pupil productions. She then went on to Oxford University, where she read Russian at Lincoln College and performed in several plays. Before becoming an actress, Mortimer wrote a column for the Daily Telegraph, and was also screenwriter for an adaptation of Lorna Sage's memoir, Bad Blood.

Career

Mortimer performed in several plays while studying at Oxford University, and while acting in a student production she was spotted by a producer who later cast her in the lead in a television adaptation of Dame Catherine Cooksons The Glass Virgin (1995). Subsequent television roles included Sharpes Sword and Coming Home. She followed this with the 1996 television film, Lord of Misrule, which also featured Richard Wilson, Stephen Moyer and Prunella Scales. The television film was directed by Guy Jenkin and filmed in Fowey, Cornwall. Her first feature film role was opposite Val Kilmer in 1996s The Ghost and the Darkness. Mortimer was then in the Irish coming-of-age story The Last of the High Kings, released later the same year.

In 1998 she appeared as Kat Ashley in Elizabeth, and played Miss Flynn in the TV mini-series Cider with Rosie, which was adapted for television by her father.

In 1999, she played three roles that raised her profile outside the UK: She was the "Perfect Girl" dropped by Hugh Grant in Notting Hill; Esther in the American TV mini-series Noahs Ark; and Angelina, the star of the film-within-a-film in Scream 3.

In 2000, Mortimer was cast as Katherine in Kenneth Branaghs musical adaptation of Loves Labours Lost, where she met actor and future husband Alessandro Nivola. She took on her biggest role in an American film to date, playing opposite Bruce Willis in Disneys The Kid. In 2002, she had a major role in The 51st State (also known as Formula 51), starring opposite Samuel L. Jackson and Robert Carlyle.

In 2003, Mortimer appeared in Stephen Frys film Bright Young Things. In 2004, Mortimer played the female lead in the film Dear Frankie. In 2005, she played a major role as the oblivious spouse of Jonathan Rhys Meyerss adulterer in Woody Allens Match Point, as well as voiced young Sophie in the English-dubbed version of Howls Moving Castle. In 2007 she played a supporting role in Lars and the Real Girl as the supportive sister-in-law of Ryan Goslings title character. She also appeared in The Pink Panther in 2006 and in its 2009 sequel, as the love interest of Inspector Clouseau (Steve Martin). In the last three episodes of 30 Rocks first season, she played Phoebe, a love interest of Alec Baldwins character, Jack Donaghy.

Mortimer played an aspiring actress opposite Andy García in City Island (2009) and as Rachel Solando in Martin Scorseses 2010 film Shutter Island. She played Leonie Gilmour in the film Leonie, released in the autumn of 2010. In 2011, she had a role in Our Idiot Brother as Liz, the sister of Paul Rudds character. In the same year, she also started work with the acclaimed screenwriter and producer Aaron Sorkin as Mackenzie McHale in HBOs The Newsroom.

In January 2013 it was announced that Mortimer would be co-creating and starring in the comedy series Doll & Em for Sky Living, along with her longtime friend, actress and comedian Dolly Wells.

Personal life

In 2000, Mortimer met American actor Alessandro Nivola, while both were starring in Love's Labour's Lost. The couple married in the Chilterns, Buckinghamshire, on 3 January 2003. A Mexican punk band performed at their wedding. Mortimer gave birth to their son, Samuel John, in Westminster, London, on 23 September 2003. Their second child, May Rose, was born on 15 January 2010. During the same year, Mortimer became an American citizen for "cynical reasons" in order to avoid paying inheritance tax in the event of anything happening to her husband. Mortimer holds dual citizenship for both the U.S. and the U.K.

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games

Awards and nominations


