
#Article: Erin Murphy
#Type: regular article

Erin Margaret Murphy (born June 17, 1964) is an American actress who is known for her role as young Tabitha Stephens in the television sitcom Bewitched, which ran from 1964 to 1972. For the first season, she shared this role with her fraternal-twin sister, Diane, as they were of similar appearance and stature. As they got older and looked less alike, Erin played the part solely.

Post-Bewitched years

Following Bewitched, Murphy guest-starred on shows such as Lassie, appeared in over 100 commercials, and modeled for Hang Ten swimwear. She was an El Toro High School cheerleader and homecoming queen. Murphy has worked as a casting director, a makeup artist, a fashion stylist, an acting teacher, a motivational speaker, and as a stunt double for actress Virginia Madsen.

Reality TV and hosting

Murphy has worked as a television host and correspondent (TVLand, Fox Reality Channel, TVGasm.com, and E!) and as the on-air moderator for Allergan Medical. She has also been an infomercial host (Ab Shark for Thane, Bun Shaper for Emson, SomaTrac Inversion Table). Murphy is the host of Disney Family.com's Parentpedia.

On December 20, 2006, she appeared as one of the 12 "strangers" on the NBC game show Identity. The contestant thought that Murphy was an Army Ranger. In 2007, she was featured on CNN Headline News as a "Celebrity With a Cause" discussing her work with autism-related charities.

In 2008, Murphy appeared as celebrity judge on Danny Bonaduce's I Know My Kid's a Star reality show contest for young actors and with Bob Saget on 1 vs. 100. She has also appeared on Craft Lab (DIY/HGTV), Groomer Has It (Animal Planet) with her giant Leonberger, and on Over Your Head (HGTV) building flagstone steps in her backyard.

Murphy also starred on Hulk Hogan's Celebrity Championship Wrestling series for CMT, in which the celebrities trained as professional wrestlers. Erin's wrestling persona is Mistress of Mayhem (aka M.O.M.) 

Murphy was a contestant in the celebrity finale of season one of Rupaul's Drag U.

Personal life

Murphy is a fashion, beauty, and luxury lifestyle writer, with her work appearing in numerous magazines and ezines.  She is also a motivational speaker and is very active in fundraising for numerous charitable organizations. Murphy often speaks out on the subject of autism because one of her sons has the disorder.

She is the celebrity spokeswoman for Verge Living, a residential-retail development in downtown Las Vegas. Her husband Darren is the president of Verge Living; Erin Murphy started its philanthropic arm, Verge Giving.

Murphy was featured in a photo spread January 2012 in OK! magazine with two of her alpacas on her ranch. Murphy discussed her company Erin Murphy Knits which offers hand knit eco-friendly alpaca wear.

See also

	Autism friendly


