
#Article: Choi Jin-sil
#Type: regular article

Choi Jin-Sil (December 24, 1968 - October 2, 2008) was a popular South Korean actress. She was considered one of the best actresses in South Korea, nicknamed "The Nation's Actress". She played leading roles in 18 movies and 20 television dramas and appeared in 140 commercials. She committed suicide by hanging on October 2, 2008, at her home in Seoul.

Early years

Choi was born as the first child to her parents Choi Guk-Hyeon and Jeong Ok-Suk on 24 December 1968 in Seoul. Her mother separated from her father since 1985 and divorced him in 1998. She had a younger brother, Choi Jin-young who was an actor and singer.

Her family was so poor that her mother once managed the household by running a pojangmacha (a small street stall selling foods). She dreamed of becoming a star to escape from the poverty. She said in talk shows her nickname during her school days was "Choisujebi" because she used to eat "sujebi" (a dumpling soup) instead of ordinary meals due to the home environment. Although she later became a high-paid model and actress, she was known for frugality, even receiving awards for her savings activity and frugality.

Career

In 1987, Choi graduated from Seonil Girls High School. She began in Koreas entertainment circles as an advertising film model. She began to gain celebrity in an advertising campaign for Samsung Electronics in which she acted as a newly wedded housewife.

 In 1988, she became a TV actress starring in the MBC historical drama, 500 Years of Joseon. Her first film was North Korean Partisan in South Korea(1990). After several experiences in TV dramas as a supporting actress, Choi played leading roles in the movie My Love, My Bride (1990) and the MBC drama Jealousy (1992). In 1998, Choi published an autobiography Yes, Lets Live Truthfully Today Too, looking back at the change from an ordinary high school graduate to a famous actress. She largely stayed out of the limelight, raising her two children after her high-profile divorce in 2004. In 2005, she returned with the soap opera My Rosy Life in a role that resurrected her career. Her last work was The Last Scandal of My Life (2008), generating many positive reviews from critics and viewers. A second season of The Last Scandal of My Life" was being planned for broadcast in November 2008 before her death. She was also an MC in a talk show, Choi Jin-sil Truth and Lie in 2008.

Personal life

In 1994, her former manager Bae Byeong-Su, who was an influential figure in the entertainment field, was murdered by her road manager. She was called in as a witness. The incident shocked the Korean public. Rumors circulated that she was implicated in the crime and she was defamed by unspecified individuals. She had a traffic accident in 1995. She came near being abducted in 1994 and 1998. She often suffered stalking.

In 2000, her marriage to Cho Sung-Min received widespread attention in South Korea. Cho was a professional baseball player with the Yomiuri Giants of Japan. They first met on a television show in 1998. Choi gave birth to a son Hwan-Hee (2001) and a daughter Joon-Hee (2003).

Cho insisted that Choi was a blameful spouse through the press without filing a lawsuit for divorce in December 2004. It was senseless act according to South Korean civil law. Choi privately had the consideration period in connection with divorce for about two years from 2002 to 2004. Choi had not been sued for divorce for the period. In September 2004, Choi decided that she divorced Cho.

Cho committed a breach of marital fidelity, violence and defamation against Choi for about two years from 2002 to 2004. In addition, Cho borrowed money from Choi's mother and Choi's younger brother and defaulted on the debt; Cho was sued for it by them. In November 2002, Cho physically attacked Choi, who was then pregnant with their second child. In August 2004, Cho again assaulted her. The former violence was known to people in December 2002 by Cho and Cho insisted that the violence had been mutual attack to the press. Cho insisted that the latter violence also had been mutual attack, the press did an in-depth reporting of the case and Choi's wounded face was opened to the public. Choi, advertising model was sued by advertiser in connection with the open act. Many lawyers defined that the lawsuit was Violence against women, they helped Choi and the defense counsel composed of twenty five lawyers argued with the advertiser in favor of Choi in law court for free.

Choi took the parental rights and child custody over the children on condition of exempting Cho's debt to her mother and brother as well as dropping several charges against Cho. Cho could only visit his children regularly according to the mutual agreement. Choi became parent with sole parental right. Choi also received the document relinquished parental right from Cho and it was notarized by a lawyer.

In January 2008, the South Korean family register (hoju) was changed. As a result, children could use their maternal family name when the family members wanted it. According to the changed register, her children changed their surname from "Cho" (paternal family name) to "Choi" (maternal family name).

After Choi's death, her mother managed the inheritance and took custody of the children.

Allegations of domestic violence

In August 2004, Choi Jin-sil came forward and declared herself a victim of domestic violence. Subsequently the advertiser, Shinhan Engineering and Construction, claimed she did not keep her contractual obligation to "maintain dignity" because she disclosed to the public her bruised and swollen face which was caused by the violence of her then husband.

On June 4, 2009, the Supreme Court reversed a high court ruling that decided in favour of Choi in a compensation suit filed by the advertiser in 2004 against the actress, who was the model for its apartments. In handing down its ruling, the Supreme Court censured Choi for coming forward and declaring herself a victim of domestic violence, saying it constituted a failure to maintain proper "social and moral honour". Her two children became defendants as heirs.

On 9 June 2009, Korean Womenlink, the Korea Women's Hot Line, and the Korea Women's Association United issued a joint statement lambasting the ruling. Women's groups censured the Supreme Court for not realising the suffering of domestic violence victims, which included Choi. As to the ruling, the groups claimed that revealing the results of domestic violence was not a matter of "dignity" but a matter of "survival". "When a person is suffering, he or she needs to restore their dignity and social honour by disclosing the damage and seeking proper legal help as Choi did," a director of Korean Womenlink said.

Death

Choi Jin-Sil committed suicide by hanging on 2 October 2008, at her home in Seoul. Her suicide was confirmed by the police. She was survived by her two children, her mother and younger brother Choi Jin-Young, who committed suicide a year and a half later. Choi's suicide triggered  a temporary 70% increase in suicide in South Korea for about a month after her death; police recorded 700 more suicides in that month than would have been typical statistically.

Cause

On 8 September 2008, Ahn Jae-hwan, the husband of popular comedian Jeong Sun-Hee, was found dead in his car. Ahn committed suicide apparently due to distress over mounting debts. Jeong and Choi had been close friends for a long time; at his funeral Choi appeared deeply shaken. Shortly after, rumours circulated on the web that Choi, as a loan shark, had lent a large sum of money to Ahn. On 22 September 2008, Choi sought a police probe into the source of the rumours, calling them groundless. On 28 September 2008, police arrested a securities company employee for spreading the rumours.

Choi came under greater stress amid rumours circulating on the Internet that she was involved in the suicide of fellow actor Ahn Jae-Hwan.

In response to Choi's death, the South Korean government tried to strengthen a legal push to regulate Internet postings. Politicians have reacted by proposing legislation that would impose a more rigorous real name registration requirement on the Internet and more heightened punishment for libelous statements.

Press reaction

The news of her death was widely reported and large number of reporters rushed to Chois house to cover the event. On the other hand, major portal web sites blocked online users from leaving replies for articles concerning Choi, for fear that some users might leave malicious comments.

"Almost 80 percent of South Koreas households have broadband access, fostering active online interactions. Most Web sites here have bulletin boards where users can post uncensored, anonymous comments, and nearly all young people run their own blogs, updating via cellphone. Such sites were a major avenue for rumors about the possible dangers of dropping a ban on American beef that fed enormous street protests and political upheaval earlier this year. Major Web portals have in recent years doubled the number of monitors to screen out online character assassination and respond more quickly to complaints of malicious rumors. But many victims still complained that vicious rumors spread so fast their reputations were ruined virtually overnight," The New York Times commented on her death on October 2, 2008.

"She was more than South Koreas Julia Roberts or Angelina Jolie. For nearly 20 years, Choi was the countrys cinematic sweetheart and as close to being a "national" actress as possible. But since her body was found on Oct. 2, an apparent suicide, she has become a symbol of the difficulties women face in this deeply conservative yet technologically savvy society. Incessant online gossip appears to have been largely to blame for her death. But its also clear that public life as a single, working, divorced mom — still a pariah status in South Korea — was one role she had a lot of trouble with," Time commented on her death on October 6, 2008.

Theft of urn

On August 15, 2009, Choi's ashes were stolen from her burial site. The police hunt for a suspect was aided by surveillance camera images showing a man carrying out the theft. On August 25, 2009, the police arrested him and Choi's ashes were found in his home.

A small memorial park for Choi Jin-Sil has been built in a cemetery in Gyeonggi Province. Choi's ashes were placed in the new tomb in the park in the Gapsan Park Cemetery in Yangpyeong on September 28, 2009. Security devices have been installed to prevent a recurrence of the theft, with the tomb specially manufactured in China and more surveillance cameras placed around the tomb.

Choi Jin-sil Foundation

Choi was the "big sister" who led the so-called "Choi Jin-Sil Association". It was a friendly group of close celebrities that included the comedians Lee Young-Ja and Jeong Sun-Hee, the models Hong Jin-Kyung and Lee So-Ra, and the actresses Choi Hwa-Jung and Uhm Jung-hwa. After Choi's death, they founded "The Choi Jin-Sil Foundation" for charity.

Drama synopsis

The drama synopsis As Life Goes On (사노라면) which Choi Jin-Sil had written was found in her home after her death.

Filmography

	 

Film

TV drama

Awards

Film awards

	 Grand Bell Awards

	 1995 (33rd) - Best Actress for How to Top My Wife

	 1993 (31st) - Most Popular Actress

	 1991 (29th) - Best New Actress for My Love, My Bride

	 Blue Dragon Film Awards

	 1991 (12th), 1992 (13th), 1993 (14th), 1994 (15th), 1995 (16th), 1997 (18th), 1998 (19th) - Popular Star Award

	 1990 (11th) - Best New Actress for Nambugun

	 Baeksang Arts Awards

	 2006, Best Actress for Television

	 1991, 1995, 1997 - Most Popular Actress

	 Chunsa Film Art Awards

	 1991, Best New Actress

Broadcasting awards

	 KBS Drama Awards

	 2005, Top Excellence Award, Actress; Netizen Award; Best Couple Award

	 1998, Top Excellence Award, Actress

	 MBC Drama Awards

	 1997, Top Excellence Award, Actress

	 2008, Achievement Award 

	 SBS Drama Awards

	 1995, New Star Award; Excellence Award, Actress

Broadcasting nominations

	 2008 MBC Drama Awards

	 Top Excellence Award, Actress

	 Best Couple Award

	 2007 MBC Drama Awards

	 Top Excellence Award, Actress

See also

	Suicide in South Korea


