
#Article: Madhuri Dixit
#Type: regular article

Madhuri Dixit (born 15 May 1967) is an Indian actress who is known for her work in Hindi cinema. A leading actress of Bollywood in the 1980s, 1990s and early-2000s, Dixit has been praised by critics for her acting and dancing skills, and achieved mass popularity due to her physical beauty. She has received six Filmfare Awards, four for Best Actress, one for Best Supporting Actress and one special award. She has been nominated for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress a record fourteen times. She was awarded the Padma Shri, India's fourth-highest civilian award, by the Government of India in 2008.

Dixit made her film debut in Abodh (1984) and received wider public recognition with Tezaab (1988). She went on to establish herself as a leading actress of Hindi cinema with the films Ram Lakhan (1989), Parinda (1989), Dil (1990), Saajan (1991), Beta (1992), Khalnayak (1993), Hum Aapke Hain Koun..! (1994), Raja (1995), and Dil To Pagal Hai (1997). She also garnered critical acclaim for her work in the dramas Anjaam (1994), Mrityudand (1997), Pukar (2000), Lajja (2001) and Devdas (2002). In 2002, she took a sabbatical from films to raise her children and made a comeback with the musical Aaja Nachle in 2007, later starring in the 2014 dramas Dedh Ishqiya and Gulaab Gang.

In addition to acting in films, Dixit has featured as a talent judge for four seasons of the dance reality show Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa. She has participated in several stage shows and has engaged in philanthropic activities. In 2014 she was appointed the UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador in India. She is married to the doctor Shriram Madhav Nene, with whom she has two children.

Early life

Madhuri Dixit is a native of Mumbai, India. She was born on 15 May 1967 in a Maharashtrian family to Shankar and Snehlata Dixit. Dixit attended Divine Child High School and Mumbai University and studied to be a microbiologist. She always desired dance since the age of 3 and went on to practice the art of kathak and later on to become a trained professional Kathak dancer.

Film career

1984-87: Early roles and film debut

Dixit made her acting debut in Rajshri Productions' movie Abodh in 1984 opposite the Bengali actor, Tapas Paul. The film failed but Dixit earned positive reviews from critics. Aakash Barvalia on Gomolo praised her as he wrote "Madhuri excels in her role as a young naive bride who acquits herself well as the naive village girl and does not realize what marriage actually entails." Her only release of 1985 was Awara Baap that turned out to be another failure for Dixit.

In 1986, Dixit starred in two movies, Swati and Manav Hatya but both films flopped at the box office. Dixit had three releases in 1987 with Mohre, Hifazat and Uttar Dakshin but her films continued to flop at the box office.

Dixit finally attained stardom after a series of consecutive flops when she landed the lead female role of Mohini in N. Chandra's blockbuster Tezaab opposite Anil Kapoor. The film went on to become that year's highest grossing movie. It was Dixit's first hit at the box office. Akshay Shah of Planet Bollywood praised Dixit for her dancing skills and her acting was also noticed. He wrote "Mahduri Dixit gives a fine tuned performance. Though she is more remembered for her crowd pleasing dance act Ek Do Teen, her acting needs to be noted, specially in the scenes where she is pitted against Anupam Kher. She looks and dances like a dream." Dixit received her first nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award for her work in Tezaab.

In 1989, her first release was Subhash Ghai's movie Ram Lakhan, in which she was paired once again with Anil Kapoor. The film became a super-hit and went on to become the second highest grossing film of the year. Dixit's next release Prem Pratigyaa, in which she starred opposite Mithun Chakraborty, earned her second nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award. Thereafter Dixit got success in Rajiv Rai's multi-starrer Tridev, in which she starred opposite Naseeruddin Shah, Jackie Shroff, Sunny Deol, Sangeeta Bijlani, Sonam and Amrish Puri. Dixit was paired with Deol. The movie became the year's third highest grossing film but Dixit did not get much acting. Dixit continued her success with her fourth pairing with Anil Kapoor in Vidhu Vinod Chopra's Parinda. Although Dixit's work was limited, she earned critical acclaim. Aniket Joshi has praised her as he wrote "Madhuri Dixit, the only female character in the film, has a small role as Paro (Karan´s love interest and Prakash´s sister) yet still does well in the few scenes she has."

1987-2002: Superstardom

In 1990, Dixit starred in the super-hit Dil opposite Aamir Khan. She played the role of a rich and arrogant girl who falls in love with a poorer boy and later leaves home to marry him. The film became the biggest box-office hit of the year in India and Dixit's performance earned her the first Filmfare Best Actress Award of her career. Madhuri was also seen in Kishen Kanhaiya opposite Anil Kapoor, the movie went on to become the third biggest hit of the year. Her strong performance as a wife helping her husband through tough times was applauded, and her acting was now being recognised. After the success of Dil, Dixit became one of the top actresses of Bollywood. The following year, she starred in the super-hit movie Saajan opposite Salman Khan and Sanjay Dutt. The movie became the year's highest-grossing movie. Dixit's performance earned her the fourth nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award.

In 1992, Dixit featured in the blockbuster Beta opposite Anil Kapoor. Dixit's performance of Saraswati, a woman married to an illiterate, well-meaning man who exposes her scheming mother-in-law earned her critical acclaim. Upperstall.com praised Dixit's work "She made Beta her own film totally stealing a march over the film's hero, Anil Kapoor. While the highlight of the film was undoubtedly Dhak Dhak Karne Laga - probably the sexiest and most popular dance of Madhuri's career, her blazing performance - that of a woman married to an illiterate, well-meaning man and who exposes her scheming mother-in-law whom her husband dotes on - had film reviewers gushing with several people jokingly saying the film should have been called Beti instead!" Dixit's performance in Beta won her a second Filmfare Best Actress Award. Following the film's success, Dixit became famously known as the "Dhak Dhak Girl" for her performance in the famous song "Dhak Dhak Karne Laga".

In 1993, Dixit starred in the controversial super-hit Khalnayak opposite Sanjay Dutt and Jackie Shroff. Her portrayal of the police officer Ganga earned her critical acclaim. Shahid Khan of Planet Bollywood praised Dixit's dancing and acting skills in the movie "In any other film, the heroine would not have much to do with a plot like this. So immense is the star-power of Madhuri Dixit that Subhash Ghai actually carved out a solid role for her in this macho tale of a bad boy and his shenanigans. She gives real competition to Sanjay Dutt. The audiences ran in their droves to witness the Madhuri Dixit magic. In every scene, she holds you captive with her stunning beauty, demanding screen presence, expressive acting and excellent dancing skills. Saroj Khan’s dance choreography is entertaining to watch, particularly in "Choli Ke Peeche Kya Hai". Madhuri’s entrance is a riot with a prison inmate asking her, "Kaisi aurat hai tu? (What kind of a woman are you?)” and she responds by slapping her and saying, "Aisi aurat hoon main! (This is the kind of woman I am!)”." Dixit's performance in Khalnayak earned her a sixth nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award and became the year's second highest grossing film. In 1994, Dixit starred in Anjaam, being paired with Shahrukh Khan for the first time. Dixit's performance of a revenge-seeking wife and mother earned her a seventh nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award. Dixit was praised for her performance, though the film was a below average performer at the box office. Her next starring role was in the all-time blockbuster Hum Aapke Hain Koun..! opposite Salman Khan. The film became one of the biggest hits in the history of Hindi cinema and made  1.35 billion worldwide, breaking the record of the film Sholay (1975). It became the highest grossing Bollywood film in Hindi cinema history after its theatrical run and held the record for 7 years till the release of Gadar: Ek Prem Katha (2001). Dixit's role of a modern yet family-oriented young girl fetched her the third Filmfare Best Actress Award of her career. Critics believed the film to be "too sweet" but appreciated Dixit's performance as she mesmerised on the screen. In the Millennium Edition of the "Guinness Book of World Records", Hum Aapke Hain Kaun became the Bollywood's highest grossing film. Upperstall.com wrote "Madhuri Dixit, reunited with the banner that launched her, stands out and is undoubtedly the life of the film as Nisha. Be it the mischievous but strong-minded, independent girl who gives it to Prem as good as she gets or the woman willing to sacrifice her love believing she is doing the right thing, Madhuri is absolutely spot on creating one of the more memorable female characters of Hindi Cinema."

1995 saw Dixit star in the hit Raja opposite Sanjay Kapoor. The film became the fourth highest grosser of the year and its success was attributed to her immense popularity. Her next release was David Dhawan's Yaraana opposite Rishi Kapoor, in which she played a dancer on the run from her abusive lover. This film was a below average performer at the box office. Both films earned her nominations for the Filmfare Best Actress Award.

Dixit's career went into a slump during 1996 as films like Prem Granth and Rajkumar flopped at the box office. In 1997, Dixit bounced back with Prakash Jha's Mrityudand, in which she performed opposite Shabana Azmi and Shilpa Shirodkar. Dixit played the role of Ketki, one of the three troubled women and earned immense critical acclaim for her performance. Upperstall.com wrote "Madhuri gives a wonderful, insightful performance as the self-respecting educated woman married into a family of male chauvinistic upper class landlords and who is humiliated by her husband when she objects to his misdeeds, never hitting a false note. She more than matches up to seasoned artists like Shabana and Om Puri in their scenes together. In a word, she is mesmerizing."

Dixit earned commercial success with Yash Raj Films' super-hit musical-romance Dil To Pagal Hai starring opposite Shahrukh Khan and Karisma Kapoor. Her portrayal of a young woman faced with a moral dilemma fetched her a fourth Filmfare Best Actress Award. The movie became the second highest grosser of the year. In 1998, Dixit had only one release Wajood opposite Nana Patekar and Mukul Dev. The film did below average business. In the following year, Dixit had again only one release Aarzoo opposite Akshay Kumar and Saif Ali Khan. Anjali Abrol of Planet Bollywood praised Dixit's performance and wrote "Madhuri, despite any role given, carries it off with ease and grace... even despite the mismatch of age, she does justice to her role, and is the best actress in Bollywood today, comparatively. She also is what I consider a classic Indian beauty.... her natural, distinctive Indian looks set her apart from many other heroines (I say heroines because many have yet to learn to act, and cannot justfully be called actresses yet), she proves that she does not need blatant blond/red highlights, tons of body paint and makeup, blue contacts, and scraps of clothes to look beautiful...and that the complete following of Western trends isn´t worth sacrificing traditional Indian beauty, grace, and respect for popularity...a mixture of both that remains respectable...it´s quality rather than quantity (or lackthereof, in the clothes department)." Aarzoo was a failure in India but was a modest success overseas. In 1999, Dixit also married a Denver-based doctor Sriram Madhav Nene decided to cut on her work.

In 2000, Dixit earned critical acclaim and commercial success with Rajkumar Santoshi's Pukar opposite Anil Kapoor and Namrata Shirodkar. Pukar was a moderate success at the box office and re-established Dixit as a competent actress. Dixit's performance of Anjali, a jealous lover was praised by critics. Anish Khanna of Planet Bollywood wrote "Her character has a gamut of emotions to run through - childish immaturity, obsession, evil, anger, anguish - and Madhuri really sinks her teeth into each one. She is magical in the dance sequences but even more amazing in the dialogue sequences. Dixit's performance in Pukar earned her twelfth nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award. Dixit's next release of the year was Gaja Gamini, which was a failure at the box office.In 2001, Dixit starred in Deepak Shivdasani's love triangle Yeh Raaste Hain Pyaar Ke opposite Ajay Devgan and Preity Zinta. The film was a flop but Dixit was praised for her performance. Dixit followed up by reuniting with Rajkumar Santoshi in the multi-starrer Lajja. She was featured in a supporting role opposite Samir Soni. Despite being a multi-starrer movie, the film failed in India but it was an overseas success. Dixit again earned critical acclaim for her performance and Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama praised her saying that "Madhuri Dixit is simply fantastic. The ease with which she emotes this complex character deserves full marks. Her expressions when her lover dumps her during the course of the play, proves what a magnificent actress she is." Dixit's performance earned her a nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress. In 2002, Dixit starred in a lead role in the much-delayed love triangle Hum Tumhare Hain Sanam opposite Shahrukh Khan and Salman Khan. The film received mainly negative reviews but did above average business at the box-office, becoming the fifth highest grossing movie of the year. Dixit's next release was Sanjay Leela Bhansali's hit film Devdas, co-starring Shahrukh Khan and Aishwarya Rai. Dixit portrayed the role of Chandramukhi, a courtesan in love with Devdas. She was praised by Sita Menon of Rediff "The most understated role and perhaps the one that is most lingering, in terms of virtuosity, is that played by Madhuri Dixit. As Chandramukhi, she is simply stunning, lending passion, fire and gentleness with such consummate ease that watching her perform is sheer delight." The film was the highest grossing movie of 2002 and Dixit's performance earned her the Filmfare Best Supporting Actress Award. It was also featured at the Cannes Film Festival. It turned out to be Dixit's last movie for a while as she took a sabbatical to have children and raise them. She moved to Denver permanently.

The following year a film named after her, Main Madhuri Dixit Banna Chahti Hoon, was released in which a woman (played by Antara Mali) aspires to become the new Madhuri Dixit by trying her luck in Bollywood. Dixit, also made her first appearance on television as a host for the India's first reality show Kahin Na Kahin Koi Hai on Sony TV.

2007-Present: return to films

In 2006, Dixit returned to Mumbai with her family to start filming for Aaja Nachle. The film released in November 2007 and, despite the critics panning it, Dixit's performance was highly appreciated, with the New York Times commenting about her that "she's still got it". Her performance in Aaja Nachle earned her the record-setting thirteenth nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award. However, after the film Dixit flew back to Denver.

In 2012, Dixit was felicitated with a Filmfare Special Award to acknowledge her completion of her 25 years of service to the Bollywood industry.

In 2012 Dixit returned to India and started shooting in 2013. Her first release was Vishal Bhardwaj's Dedh Ishqiya (2014), a sequel to the much acclaimed Ishqiya (2010). She was cast as a con-woman in the form of a Begum opposite Naseeruddin Shah, Arshad Warsi and Huma Qureshi. The movie opened to widespread critical acclaim and unanimous praise. The film also proved to be profit-oriented. Critics called it a successful comeback.Taran Adarsh of the entertainment portal Bollywood Hungama called Dixit," a powerhouse of talent", Rediff.com reviewed, "Her performance - one that demands small, precise shifts in tone instead of showy histrionics - is pitched perfectly. And it’s a privilege to see her dance the classics. and Deepanjana Pal of firstpost writing, "She's still capable of keeping an audience glued to their seats when the credits start rolling, all because she's dancing on screen." The film earned Dixit her fourteenth nomination for Filmfare Award for Best Actress.

Her next and final release was the women-centric drama Gulaab Gang. Dixit played the role of Rajjo, a women leader fighting for the justice of women. The film was noted for bringing two leading yestyear actresses Dixit and Juhi Chawla onscreen together for the first time. Gulaab Gang flopped at the box office earning mixed reviews. Danny Bowes wrote, "Dixit is one of the all-time greats and getting to see her work is a delight regardless of the surrounding film's quality, but getting to see her wreaking havoc in the kind of wild action sequences usually reserved for the thick-mustached, bare-chested, and male is a particular joy" and Koimoi reviewing, " Dixit is effectively convincing in her spirited performance adding fiber to her largely author backed role with perseverance. The lady after the delicate role of Begum Para in Dedh Ishqiya shows her mettle in with equal vigor proclaiming to the younger guns what female superstars of Bollywood were originally made of." Gulaab Gang was criticized due to the presence of Dixit's songs in a serious social film.

Later on in 2014, Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa was renewed for a new season and Dixit returned to the judging panel for the fourth time with her co-judges Remo D'Souza and Karan Johar.

Artistry

Dance

Dixit is not only known for her acting skills, but for her dancing skills as well. Often referred to as the "Dhak Dhak Girl", she is famous for her dance in the song "Dhak Dhak Karne Laga" from the film Beta. She is also known for her dance sequences accompanying Bollywood songs such as "Ek Do Teen" (from Tezaab), "Humko Aaj Kal Hai" (from Sailaab), "Bada Dukh Deenha" (from Ram Lakhan), "Chane Ke Khet Mein" (from Anjaam), "Didi Tera Devar Deewana" (from Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!), "Choli Ke Peechhe" (from Khalnayak), "Akhiyan Milaun" (from Raja), "Mera Piya Ghar Aaya" (from Yaraana), "Kay Sera Sera" (from Pukar), "Badi Mushkil" (from Lajja), "Maar Daala" (from Devdas), "Aaja Nachle" (from Aaja Nachle), and "Ghagra" (from Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani).

Pandit Birju Maharaj, a Kathak dancer, who choreographed Dixit in the film Devdas for the song "Kaahe Chhed" calls her as "the best Bollywood dancer due to her versatility." Film critic Raja Sen describes Dixit as "the industry's numero uno in every sense." Further he elaborates, "She is an exemplary dancer. From Kathak to Dhak Dhak, she's done it all and wowed us every step of the way." Saroj Khan, who choreographer most of Dixit's early hits, after working with her again in Gulaab Gang called her, "choreographer's delight".

As an actress, Dixit has often been compared to Madhubala, Meena Kumari and Nargis, who were among the most popular actresses of the black-and-white era of Bollywood. She was often referred to as the Madhubala of the 1990s.

Dance Academy

In 2013, Madhuri launched her own dance academy through an online website which is called "Dance with Madhuri. The academy is accessible to 200 countries and has more than 200,000 frequent users. As well as Madhuri, other very well known dancing gurus have been teaching on "Dance with Madhuri" such as the National award winning choreographer Saroj Khan, Pandit Birju Maharaj, Remo D'souza and many more.

The dance academy teaches all types of dance forms such as Bollywood, Waltz, Samba, Dandia, etc. Madhuri also teaches one on one special classes, teaching her students some of her most memorable dance numbers such as Ek Do Teen, Mayi Ne Mayi, Aaja Nachle, Ghagra and Badi Mushkil.

Non-acting work

Stage performances

Dixit is a frequent performer and has participated in several world tours and concerts. With a huge fan base, Madhuri is one of the most requested stars to perform nationally and internationally. She has taken part in some of the biggest Bollywood tours in the world, with some of the biggest stars, such as Amitabh Bachchan and Shah Rukh Khan.

In the mid-2008, Madhuri, Aishwarya Rai Bachchan, Abhishek Bachchan, Amitabh Bachchan, Preity Zinta, Ritesh Deshmukh, starred in the "Unforgettable World Tour" stage production. The tour covered the USA, Canada, Trinidad, and London, England.

In 2013, Dixit joined the fourth instalment of Shah Rukh Khans Temptation tour "Temptation Reloaded" where they visited and performed series of concerts in Auckland, Perth, Sydney and Dubai; it also featured Rani Mukerji, Deepika Padukone, Jacqueline Fernandez, Honey Singh and Meiyang Chаng. Madhuri also performed at the 14th IIFA Awards 2013, where she made her first ever appearance which was held in Macau.

In March 2014, Madhuri was again invited to perform at the 15th IFFA Awards 2014, where she danced on a medley of her most popular dance numbers. On 5 October 2014 Madhuri was seen performing in London at the O2 arena. She performed as a part of joining her good friend Shah Rukh Khan for his promotional tour 'The Slam Tour' to promote his upcoming movie Happy New Year. Again on 25 October, Madhuri Dixit performed in Mauritius in the Anjalay Stadium on the occasion of Diwali which also featured Farhan Akhtar.

Legal notice for alleged false representation in endorsements

In May- June 2015 the Tamil Nadu Consumer's Forum slapped notices on her for "false representation" in advertisements of Maggi, a noodle brand in which toxic levels of lead were found. She continued endorsing about the safety of the product in Twitter, even when food regulators had already found more than 17 times the permissible limits of lead and its product banned.

On June 5, 2015, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) orders banned all nine approved variants of Maggi instant noodles from India, terming them "unsafe and hazardous" for human consumption. It was also found that the "health oats noodles", a product which had not even completed the mandatory "process of risk assessment" was promoted by the actress.

Social work

 In 2001 Dixit won   on Kaun Banega Crorepati, a game show then in its first season on the air. She directed that her winnings be donated for the welfare of victims of an earthquake in Gujarat and to an orphanage in Pune.

In 2009 Dixit performed for NDTV Toyota Greenathon—India's first-ever nationwide campaign for save the environment and creating awareness about environmental issues. NDTV organised India's first 24-hour live telethon, a fund-raising event that brings in people to donate money to support TERI's initiative—Lighting a Billion Lives which aims at providing solar power to villages without electricity. Dixit became a part of this great social cause, and she performed her hit numbers on the live show.

On 3 February 2011 Dixit spent an evening with 75 orphanage kids of farmers at an ashram in Trimbakeshwar and participated in the birthday of two children: Hrishikesh and Rani. "We artists are ready to help such children. People from the higher society should come forward and stand firmly behind them," she said on the occasion. Dixit is a Goodwill Ambassador and a patron for "Emeralds for Elephants" — a charity project for the conservation of Asian Elephants and other endangered species. This project has been designed to create awareness and raise vital funds for the protection of the critically endangered Asian Elephant. A collaborative project between the World Land Trust (a UK based nonprofit environmental organisation) and the Wildlife Trust of India that is creating protected wildlife corridors connecting National Parks and protected areas to others. Speaking about the issue she said: "Elephants are one of my favourite animals and I love them. So what we need to do today is to see how we can preserve our animals. I feel very strongly about this."

On 4 February 2012 Madhuri Dixit interacted with Cancer affected children on World Cancer Day organised by Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd at Juhu, Mumbai.On World Cancer Day Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited offered a Free Joy Ride to Cancer affected children with the support of Cancer Patients Aid Association. In June 2014, Dixit was appointed as the "Goodwill Ambassador Advocate" for child and equal woman's rights. When appointed as the chief advocate for Child rights.

Television appearances

In the year 1985, she appeared in the Rajshri Production's TV show Paying Guest. She came in the first episode of the show as Neena.

In 2001 on the popular game show Kaun Banega Crorepatis first season, hosted by Amitabh Bachchan, she won   that she donated for people affected in natural calamities. She also made an appearance in Season 4's Grand Finale that aired in 2010. In 2002, Dixit hosted a TV show Kahina Kahi Koi Hai which was a match-making show that aired on Sony Entertainment.

She also made appearances on Koffee with Karan in Seasons two and three that aired in 2007 and 2011, respectively. Her Season 2 appearance was a solo appearance and in Season 3 she shared the chat show with Sonakshi Sinha. In 2014, Madhuri made her third appearance on Koffee with Karan, on its fourth season alongside Juhi Chawla.

Dixit has been guest on Nach Baliye Season 1 and 3, a celebrity-couple dancing competition in 2005 (aired on Star One) & 2007 (aired on Star Plus).

In 2011, she appeared as a judge on the dance reality show Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 4 along with other co-judges Remo D'souza and Malaika Arora Khan.

In 2012 and 2013, Dixit rejoined for Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 5 and Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 6 along with her co-judges Remo D'souza and Karan Johar.

Madhuri also appeared on Indias Got Talent as a guest judge on two separate occasions for the promotion of her upcoming movies Dedh Ishqiya and Gulaab Gang that released in early 2014.

Later on in 2014, Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa was renewed for a new season, Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 7 where yet again we saw the diva herself Madhuri Dixit return to the judging panel for her fourth time with her co-judges Remo D'souza and Karan Johar.

Personal life

During the making of Saajan, Madhuri was proposed by Sanjay Dutt who was married at the time to Richa Sharma. However, with Dutt's arrest under TADA in 1993, Madhuri ended the relationship.

On 17 October 1999, Dixit married Dr. Shriram Madhav Nene, a cardiovascular surgeon from Los Angeles, California. They have two sons, Arin (b. March 2003) and Rayaan (b. March 2005). After her marriage, Dixit relocated to Denver, Colorado, for almost a decade. She moved back to Mumbai with her family in October 2011.

Dixit has been the muse for the Indian painter M.F. Husain. He was so fascinated by Dixit in Hum Aapke Hain Koun..! that he watched the film 67 times, and in 2007 he booked an entire theatre to see her comeback movie Aaja Nachle. He made a series of paintings of her, and in 2000 made a film named Gaja Gamini starring her, which was intended as a tribute to Dixit herself.

Dixit has always been a passionate dancer, and therefore turned her passion into reality by opening her own online dance academy "Dance With Madhuri", where her fans have a one to one lesson to learn some of her most famous and well known dance numbers.

Awards and nominations

Filmography


