
#Article: Andrey Filatov
#Type: regular article

Andrey Vasilievich Filatov (Андре́й Васи́льевич Фила́тов; born 18 December 1971) is a Russian entrepreneur. Filatov is Chairman of the Board of Directors of Tuloma investment company, a co-owner, Board of Directors Member and Chief Executive Officer of N-Trans, a transport infrastructure group of companies. Andrey Filatov is also President of the Russian Chess Federation and vice president of the International Chess Federation (FIDE). He is Honorary Academician of the Russian Academy of Arts.

Biography

Completed secondary education at Junior Sporting School 9 in the city of Dnepropetrovsk, Ukraine, USSR. Got ranked Candidate for Master of Sport of the USSR (chess). In 1993, graduated from the Academy of Physical Education and Sports of the Republic of Belarus (the Belorussian State University of Physical Culture) with the diploma of Sport Instructor and Chess Coach. At the Academy met and made friends with such chess players as Ilya Smirin and Boris Gelfand.

In 1996, together with his partners Konstantin Nikolaev and Nikita Mishin founded Severstaltrans, of which was Member of the Board of Directors and Chief Executive Officer since foundation. In 2008, the Severstaltrans Group was renamed as N-Trans.

Andrey Filatov is a member of the Economic Council of the French-Russian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (CCIFR).

In 2015 for his contribution to the development and popularization of Russian and Soviet art has been awarded the title of Honorary Academician of the Russian Academy of Arts.

Adviser to the CEO of the Petrolesport JSC.

Married with three children.

Estimated Wealth

Andrey Filatov’s main asset is Tuloma investment company. In addition he owns a share in the N-Trans Group including Global Ports company listed at the London Stock Exchange. Не is also a co-owner of the railway companies Globaltrans and Transoil Ltd (7%).

In October 2015, Filatov announced consolidation into Tuloma Investment Company, which specializes in investing in Russian companies and shares, of his personal assets (other than N-Trance, Transoil and Globaltrans). Tuloma’s investment portfolio includes stakes in Coal Mining Investments Ltd., Fabrikant, Pskovneft-Terminal, real estate development projects of Volgo-Okskaya Investment Company (VOIC), Pushkin, StroyEngineering Development, as well as shares in FosAgro, Novatek, MegaFon, LukOil, Surgutneftegas and Norilsk Nickel.

In 2010, the Finance magazine estimated Andrey Filatov’s wealth at $0.92 billion.

In 2011, the Russian version of the Forbes magazine ranked Filatov 93rd among Russia’s wealthiest businesspersons, with an estimated wealth of $1.1 billion.

In 2012, in the Forbes World Listing estimated Filatov’s wealth at $1.3 billion (ranked 960th globally).

Awards

	 Commemorative Medal "300 Years of the Russian Navy" (1996)

	 Russian Presidential Certificate of Merit (21 Jan. 2011) for active involvement of the transfer by the Republic of Korea of the Russian cruiser Varyag (1899) jack flag to the Russian Federation

	 The Moscow Times Awards (10 December 2013) - for sponsoring the startup of the first television channel dedicated exclusively to chess.

	 The most popular Russian sports manager of 2014 according to the Sport History and Statistics Fan Club (Russia) rating

	 Five Continents Medal of UNESCO (26 May 2015)

Chess and public activities

Andrei Filatov is a member of the Economic Council of French and Russian Businesses of the Franco-Russian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (CCIFR).

Filatov is a member of the Valaam Monastery Board of Guardians.

He has been keen on chess since childhood.

Filatov was the initiator and sponsor of the World Chess Championship 2012 held in Moscow in 2012, in the State Tretyakov Gallery. According to Filatov, “By holding the match in a museum we are attempting to emphasize the link between our favorite game and the arts, as well as pay tribute to the memory of great Russian artists in the broadest sense, including painters, writers, composers and musicians.”. The game was played between Boris Gelfand and Viswanathan Anand.

Filatov funded the restoration of the tombstone monument to one of the greatest chess players, Alexander Alekhine, who was the first Russian by birth world champion, in Paris.

In the memory of his first chess coach, Alexander Valerianovich Sinitsyn, Filatov set up the Sinitsyn Memorial international children chess festival, which is being held in Dnepropetrovsk since 2001.

On 1 February 2014 on the 22nd congress of the Russian Chess Federation Andrey Filatov was elected President of the Russian Chess Federation.

13 August 2014 Andrei Filatov, the President of the Russian Chess Federation, was elected for the post of the vice president of the International Chess Federation (FIDE) at the world federation’s congress currently underway in Norway’s Tromso.

Filatov is collecting pieces of Art - painting, graphic works, and sculpture as well. In his collection are works of such painters as Igor Grabar, Pyotr Konchalovsky, Konstantin Korovin, Gely Korzhev, Viktor Popkov, Arkady Plastov, Nicolai Fechin, Aleksandr Laktionov. The collection was start with "Portrait of the engraver J.Watts" by Nikolai Fechin. This portrait in 1924 obtained Thomas R.Procter prize by the National Academy of Design in USA. The favorite Andrey Filatov’s painter is Viktor Popkov.

Art Russe Fund

In 2012 Andrey Filatov established the Filatov Family Art Fund for the purpose of collecting the found abroad Russian and Soviet paintings and sculptures.

In June 2014 the Filatov Family Art Fund announces that it is rebranding to Art Russe as it prepares to open a new museum in London. Art Russe will continue the work of the Filatov Family Art Fund, but will take on a broader role, with the focus shifting from collecting art to showing the world the breadth and depth of the talent that thrived in Russia.

29 July 2014 Art Russe has become a Patron of the Serpentine Galleries, one of London’s leading art galleries. The agreement demonstrates Art Russe’s commitment to supporting international galleries, museums and exhibitions, as it plans to launch its own museum in London.

Marking the 70th anniversary of the Victory in Europe, in spring 2015 Art Russe arranged the art exhibition The Legacy of World War II in Russian Art in Saatchi Gallery, London. The exhibition featured paintings and sculptures, most of which had never before been on public display in the UK, including Alexander Laktionov's Letter from the Front; the Tkachev brothers' By the Well; Igor Obrosov’s Wartime Moscow 1941; Ivan Penteshin’s The Defence of Leningrad; Evsey Moiseenko’s Freedom; Gely Korzhev’s The Reunion and Mai Danzig's monumental canvas And the World Remembers the Saviours.

Foundation Art Russe participated in the preparation of the exhibition "Astronauts: The birth Birth of the space Space ageAge,", which opened on 17 September 17, 2015 began its work in London's Science Museum (Science Museum). Some exceptionally For the exhibition in Moscow were brought rrare exhibits related to the Soviet space program, which had have never travelled outside exported outside of Russia before. were brought to London for the exhibition. Among them - Including - engines R-7 ballistic missile engines, R-7 spacecraft "Vostok-6 spacecraft", which carried flew the world's first woman female astronautcosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova to space, personal belongings of astronauts, the objects of their everyday life on board, and even a space cosmic souls shower.

Art Russe has organized the first in the Middle East, a large-scalemajor exhibition of Russian and Soviet art of the twentieth century in the Middle East, which has opened on 6 October 6, 2015 in the capital of the United Arab Emirates, Abu Dhabi. The exhibition, eEntitled "Art Russe Collection of 20th Century Russian and Soviet art Artof the XX century Art Russe: War and Peace", which the exhibition includes more than 120 works and is held , takes place under the patronage of the Minister of Culture, Youth and Social Development of, the United Arab Emirates, Sheikh Nahyan bin Mubarak Al Nahyan. The exhibition will run until December 2015.


