
#Article: Christine Taylor
#Type: regular article

Christine Joan Taylor-Stiller (born July 30, 1971) is an American actress, best known for her roles as Melody Hanson on Hey Dude and as Marcia Brady in The Brady Bunch Movie.

Early life

Taylor was born on July 30, 1971, in Allentown, Pennsylvania, to Joan, a homemaker, and Albert E. "Skip" Taylor III, who owns a security company. She grew up in neighboring Wescosville, Pennsylvania. Taylor has a brother, Brian, and attended Allentown Central Catholic High School.

Career

Taylor began her acting career in 1989 on the Nickelodeon children's television series Hey Dude where she played the lifeguard Melody Hanson. She continued in that role through 1991 while making various guest appearances on other programs. In 1995, Taylor was cast as Marcia Brady in The Brady Bunch Movie and later in A Very Brady Sequel. Following The Brady Bunch Movie, Taylor made several comedic guest appearances on Ellen, landing the lead role in the television series Party Girl, based on the 1995 film of the same name, and more guest appearances on Seinfeld and Friends. She played the racist school bully Laura Lizzie in the 1996 horror film The Craft, and also played Drew Barrymore's cousin, Holly Sullivan, in the 1998 comedy The Wedding Singer. In 2001, she starred alongside her husband, Ben Stiller, in Zoolander.

Later, she made television appearances as a guest star, in 2005, in two episodes of Arrested Development as "Sally Sitwell" and, in 2006, in an episode of NBC's My Name Is Earl. In July 2006, Taylor's husband Ben Stiller announced plans to direct a CBS sitcom starring Taylor, but the series never aired. She has appeared with Mandy Moore in both Dedication and License to Wed. In 2010, Taylor guest starred on Hannah Montana Forever. In 2010, she also starred in the Hallmark Channel Christmas movie Farewell Mr. Kringle. In 2013, Taylor reprised her role as Sally Sitwell in two episodes of the revived Arrested Development.

Personal life

Taylor married Ben Stiller on May 13, 2000. They met while making the TV show Heat Vision and Jack. Stiller and Taylor appeared onscreen together in Zoolander, Dodgeball: A True Underdog Story, Tropic Thunder, Curb Your Enthusiasm, and Arrested Development. They reside in Westchester County, New York and have a daughter, Ella Olivia, and a son, Quinlin Dempsey. Both have adopted a vegan diet for health reasons.

Filmography


