
#Article: Becki Newton
#Type: regular article

Rebecca Sara "Becki" Newton (born July 4, 1978) is an American actress, known for her roles as Amanda Tanen on Ugly Betty and Quinn Garvey on How I Met Your Mother.

Biography

Early life and education

Newton was born in New Haven, Connecticut. She is of English and Czech descent. Her maternal grandfather was composer and arranger Bruce Chase. She began performing musicals and plays at local theaters, and studied at the University of Pennsylvania, where she graduated with a B.A. in European History.

After graduation, Newton then moved to New York City and landed several roles in television commercials for such companies as the Olive Garden.

Career

Newton portrayed the character Amanda Tanen in the ABC comedy-drama series Ugly Betty from 2006 to 2010. With co-star Michael Urie, Newton co-hosted the official Ugly Betty podcast. She also starred in ABC.com's web series Mode After Hours opposite Urie. Her performance attracted extremely positive reviews from critics and Amanda was arguably one of, if not the most popular character on the show, mainly due to her comical personality. Ugly Betty was canceled in 2010 after four seasons, allowing the show to receive a proper series finale.

In late 2009, Newton performed at a New York City Center Encores! presentation of the Gershwin musical Girl Crazy, which was directed by Jerry Zaks. She portrayed Molly Gray and performed opposite real-life husband Chris Diamantopoulos.

Newton starred in the television series Love Bites in 2011. The hour-long romantic comedy was created by executive producer Cindy Chupack, who worked on Sex and the City. NBC announced the pick up of the series in May 2010. However, with Newton announcing her pregnancy, co-star Jordana Spiro contractually obligated to stay with her other show, My Boys (which was later cancelled), and Chupack's desire to leave the show, Love Bites was pushed back to midseason. Love Bites aired in July 2011 on NBC and was cancelled after eight episodes. In November 2011, Newton was cast on CBS's How I Met Your Mother as Quinn Garvey, a love interest for Neil Patrick Harris's character Barney Stinson where she played a stripper. In 2013, Newton starred in the midseason Fox comedy series The Goodwin Games.

Personal life

Newton met her husband, actor Chris Diamantopoulos, in a subway station in New York, and they married on May 12, 2005. It was announced on July 1, 2010 that Newton and Diamantopolous were expecting their first child. She gave birth to a son in early November 2010 and a daughter in early 2014.

Her older brother, Matt Newton, is also an actor. He played the recurring role of Marc St. James' boyfriend Troy in the fourth and final season of Ugly Betty. Her mother, Jennifer, is an award-winning artist, and her aunt, Stephanie Chase, is a classical violinist.

Filmography


