
#Article: Jolene Blalock
#Type: regular article

Jolene Blalock (born March 5, 1975) is an American film and television actress and model, best known for playing the Vulcan T'Pol on the UPN science fiction series Star Trek: Enterprise. She is a regular guest star in television films and series and has appeared in a few feature films.

Early life

Jolene Blalock was born and raised in San Diego, California, with three siblings. She spent her childhood developing surfing and artistic skills. She said of her childhood:

Early career

A popular model, Blalock left home at 17 to model in Europe and Asia. She has appeared on the cover of many mens lifestyle magazines, was twice featured in Maxims "Girls of Maxim" gallery and was named the 10th sexiest woman in the world in 2005 by FHM. She posed for a clothed fashion layout in Playboy in April 2002. She was later interviewed by the magazine for its "20Q" section in February 2005.

Blalock spent years dieting as a model and was relieved to move into acting, saying: "Im jaded by my experiences in the modelling industry. Youre never skinny or perfect enough and it was difficult mentally making the transition to acting."

She made her television debut in sitcom Veronicas Closet, before guest appearances in The Love Boat: The Next Wave, CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, JAG and starring as Medea in a 2000 television movie adaptation of Jason and the Argonauts. She also appeared in On the Edge and the mini-series The Diamond Hunters before being cast in Star Trek: Enterprise.

Star Trek: Enterprise (2001-2005)

Landing a role on Enterprise was Blalock's biggest break and she described it as a dream come true. She admitted she was excited at being a newcomer to the series:

2003-present

Blalock appeared in the film Slow Burn with LL Cool J and Ray Liotta which was shot in 2003 between seasons 3 and 4 of Enterprise, unveiled at the Toronto International Film Festival in September 2005 and finally saw limited theatrical release in 2007.

She guest-starred in two episodes of Stargate SG-1 as Ishta, leader of a group of female Jaffa.

She was scheduled to appear on an episode of Lost during the 2005-2006 season as a former love interest of Sawyer (Josh Holloway). Even though she filmed some scenes, the flashback scenes in that episode were changed from Sawyer to Michael (Harold Perrineau) and her scenes were never used in an episode nor featured as "deleted scenes" in the DVD set's bonus material. Set photos from the shooting of a scene surfaced in 2008.

She played Captain Lola Beck in Starship Troopers 3: Marauder, which was released directly to DVD in the US, on August 5, 2008.

She made an appearance on the House episode titled "Teamwork" as Lexa, the wife of the porn star featured as the patient in this episode; airdate: November 16, 2009.

She played Sister Nicci, a Sister of the Dark, in the second season of Legend of the Seeker, appearing in episode nine, "Dark", broadcast on January 23, 2010 and episode ten, "Perdition", broadcast on January 30, 2010.

Blalock had a supporting role as Stacy in the William Kaufman action thriller Sinners And Saints, set in post-Katrina New Orleans, which premiered in Los Angeles on June 30, 2010.

She has not participated in conventions or given interviews regarding her role in Star Trek: Enterprise except for FedCon XIV in May 2005, but did agree to join the cast reunion for an interview during the Blu-ray conversion and production. She also appeared as a parody version of herself (ironically, attending a Star Trek convention) in a 2009 episode of the sitcom 10 Items or Less titled "Star Trok."

Personal life

She is married to Michael Rapino, CEO of Live Nation - the two met when he booked her for a beer commercial in Los Angeles. He lived in England and while working on Enterprise she found conducting a long-distance relationship difficult, running up an "astronomical" phone bill. She proposed to him and the two married in Negril, Jamaica on April 22, 2003.

Blalock is a passionate dog lover and appeared on the cover of the popular British dog publication K9 Magazine.

Acting roles


