
#Article: Tamera Mowry
#Type: regular article

Tamera Darvette Mowry-Housley (née Mowry; born July 6, 1978), known by her maiden name Tamera Mowry, is an American actress and model. She first gained fame for her teen role as Tamera Campbell on the ABC/WB sitcom Sister, Sister (opposite her identical twin sister Tia Mowry). She has also starred in the Disney Channel Original Movie Twitches and its sequel, Twitches Too. and played Dr. Kayla Thornton on the medical drama Strong Medicine. A reality TV show following the life of her and her twin sister, Tia & Tamera, began airing on the Style Network in 2011, ending in 2013 after three seasons.

Currently, she is one of the hosts of The Real talk show along with Adrienne Bailon, Jeannie Mai, Tamar Braxton and Loni Love, which premiered on July 15, 2013.

She and her identical twin sister Tia Mowry were in a singing group in the early 1990s called "Voices". The group debuted their first single, "Yeah, Yeah, Yeah!" in 1992 and charted No.12 on the Billboard Hot 100 with TLC.

Personal life

Tamera Darvette Mowry was born in Gelnhausen in then-West Germany on July 6, 1978 to Darlene Renee Mowry (née Flowers), a security guard and later her children's manager, and Timothy John Mowry, who was in the U.S. Army at the time of her birth and who became a custody officer/jailer with the City of Glendale Police Department when the family moved to California. Tamera Mowry is the older twin by two minutes. Tamera was born at 4:30pm, followed by Tia at 4:32pm.

Her father has English ancestry, and her mother is of Afro-Bahamian descent. Mowry's parents met in high school, in Miami, Florida, both joining the U.S. Army, and both eventually reaching the rank of Sergeant. Mowry has described her family as being both "close-knit" and "deeply religious", and the sisters became born-again Christians when they were eight years old. She also has two younger brothers named Tahj Mowry, an actor, and Tavior Mowry, who plays college football for University of California, Davis.

In July 2013, Tamera revealed that she did not lose her virginity until she was 29 due to her being a devout Christian, and that after she did it, she felt guilty and committed to staying celibate until marriage. She married Fox News Correspondent Adam Housley after dating for almost six years. The couple married on May 15, 2011 in California's Napa Valley. The couple welcomed their first child, a son, Aden John Tanner Housley, on November 12, 2012. On January 4, 2015, Mowry-Housley announced through social media that she is expecting her second child, a girl, due in July 2015. The couple welcomed daughter, Ariah Talea Housley, on July 1, 2015.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations

NAACP Image Awards

	 1996: Nominated - Outstanding Youth Actor/Actress for Sister, Sister (shared with Tia Mowry)

	1999: Won - Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Comedy Series for Sister, Sister (shared with Tia Mowry)

	2000: Won - Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Comedy Series for Sister, Sister (shared with Tia Mowry)

	 2011: Nominated - Outstanding Actress in a Television Movie, Mini-Series, or Dramatic Special for Double Wedding

	 2013: Nominated — Outstanding Reality Series for Tia & Tamera

Nickelodeon Kids Choice Awards

	1995 - Won - Favorite Television Actress for Sister, Sister (shared with Tia Mowry)

	1996 - Won - Favorite Television Actress for Sister, Sister (shared with Tia Mowry)

	1997 - Won - Favorite Television Actress for Sister, Sister (shared with Tia Mowry)

	 1998 - Nominated - Favorite Television Actress for Sister, Sister (shared with Tia Mowry)

	1998 - Won - Hall of Fame Award (shared with Tia Mowry)

Peoples Choice Awards

	2012: Nominated - Best Reality Star for Tia & Tamera (shared with Tia Mowry)

Teen Choice Awards

	2012: Nominated - Choice Reality Show for Tia & Tamera (shared with Tia Mowry)

	2012: Nominated - Choice Female Reality Star for Tia & Tamera (shared with Tia Mowry)

Young Artist Awards

	 1995 - Nominated - Best Youth Comedienne in a TV Show for Sister, Sister (shared with Tia Mowry)

	 1996 - Nominated - Best Performance by a Young Actress - TV Comedy Series for Sister, Sister (shared with Tia Mowry)

	 1997 - Nominated - Best Performance in a TV Comedy - Leading Young Actress for Sister, Sister (shared with Tia Mowry)

	 2001 - Nominated - Best Performance in a TV Movie (Comedy) - Leading Young Actress for Seventeen Again (shared with Tia Mowry)


