
#Article: Gabriela Duarte
#Type: regular article

Gabriela Duarte Franco Goldfuss (born April 15, 1974 in Campinas, São Paulo) is a Brazilian actress. She is also the daughter of actress Regina Duarte.

Biography

She is the daughter of actress Regina Duarte and businessman Marcos Flávio Cunha Franco. She worked in the film O Vestido, which won her the award for Best Actress at the Festival de Cinema Ibero-Americano de Huelva. Her first film was in 1983, O Cangaceiro Trapalhão.

She debuted on television in 1989, the miniseries Colônia Cecília. After part of Top Model, her first soap opera. Participated in the remake of Irmãos Coragem, in 1995 in which she played the character played by her mother Regina Duarte on the first version. A year later, she participated in two episodes of the series A Vida Como Ela É, based on the work of Nelson Rodrigues.

In 1997, she gained widespread visibility in the soap opera Por Amor, where she played Maria Eduarda, a character who has generated controversy. Many disliked her interpretation, and was even created a website in the spirit "I hate Eduarda".

In the miniseries Chiquinha Gonzaga in 1999, she played the composer as a young man and her mother, Regina Duarte, played the same character at maturity. After a brief hiatus in her career, consisting only made investments in soap operas and series, in 2005 in América acts in the role of Simone, a veterinarian who engages with the protagonist of the story.

In 2007, operates in Sete Pecados, which gets some recognition of the public with the character Miriam, a public school principal who struggles against racial and social prejudices and believes in the improvement of public education.

In 2008, the actress makes an appearance on the show Casos e Acasos (Globo). The following year, participates in the microarray Acampamento de Férias, Renato Aragão, displayed by Rede Globo.

After three years of small roles in serials, soap operas back in Passione, the role of Jessica, a "new rich" spoiled, jealous and nymphomaniac. Considered by actress a "turning point" in her career, such a character received critical acclaim and the public, where also the second actress leaves the stigma of her character in For Love and ceases to be compared with her mother Regina.

In 2011, she participated in a new framework of the Fantástico, made especially for Father's Day, É Pai, É Pedra, playing Mônica on 4 episodes. In 2013, returns to cinema with comedy Mato sem Cachorro and will make a cameo on the soap opera Amor à Vida of Walcyr Carrasco.

Personal life

Daughter of actress Regina Duarte and businessman Marcos Flávio Cunha Franco. In 2002, he married the photographer Jairo Goldfuss.

In 2006, his first born daughter, Manuela. And on December 17, 2011, was born his second son, Frederico.

Filmography

Television

Film


