
#Article: Kelli Williams
#Type: regular article

Kelli Renee Williams (born June 8, 1970) is an American actress. She is best known for her roles as Lindsay Dole on the legal drama The Practice, psychologist and deception expert Dr. Gillian Foster on Lie to Me, and Jackie Clark on Army Wives.

Early life

Kelli Williams was born in Los Angeles, California. She is the daughter of actress Shannon Wilcox and plastic surgeon John Williams. Her parents divorced when she was 13. She has one brother and two half-brothers.

Williams earned her Screen Actors Guild card before her first birthday by appearing in a diapers commercial, and appeared in several other commercials as a child. She attended elementary school at Lycée Français, and graduated from Beverly Hills High School in 1988. While attending school, she was active in the performing arts department. After starring opposite General Hospital's Steve Burton in the school's production of Romeo and Juliet, she was signed by an agent.

Career

Williams began her career on television, with a second-season role in an episode of the CBS series Beauty and the Beast and as the first victim of the Hillside Stranglers in NBC's made-for-TV film The Case of the Hillside Stranglers. Her first feature film appearances were in Zapped Again! (1990) and There Goes My Baby (1994) opposite ER's Noah Wyle. She also appeared in The Young Riders in 1991. Also in 1994, she played Jennifer Stolpa in the television movie Snowbound: The Jim and Jennifer Stolpa Story. She guest starred on the hit Fox teen drama Party of Five in its first season in 1994 as a woman named Annie Alcott. She also guest starred in the second season Law & Order episode "Sisters Of Mercy" as a sexually abused meth addict in 1992.

Beginning with Episode 11 titled "Moon Cross" (aired on February 5, 1995) of the science fiction series Earth 2, Williams appeared in a multiple episode story arc in the role of Mary, a human orphan raised on another planet by the indigenous alien species known as the Terrians.

She appeared in 1996 in the 19th episode of the fourth and final season of the TV series Picket Fences as an Amish woman who was raped.

In 1997, she took her most prominent role as Lindsay Dole Donnell on the ABC legal drama The Practice. She appeared in the series The Lyon's Den and Hack, as well as two episodes of Scrubs. Williams appeared as Dr. Natalie Durant on the NBC television show Medical Investigation which began in the fall of 2004 and ran for 20 episodes before being cancelled. Also in 2004, she starred in the television movie A Boyfriend for Christmas.

In 2000, Williams starred in the TV Movie Flowers for Algernon, based on the novel/short story by Daniel Keyes.

In May 2007, she portrayed Holly Lauren/Kathleen Shaw in the Law & Order: Criminal Intent sixth season finale episode, "Renewal"; as a neighbor and later girlfriend to Detective Mike Logan (Chris Noth), her character dies towards the end of the episode. In August 2008, Williams was cast in a lead role as psychologist Dr. Gillian Foster in the Fox series Lie to Me, which ran for three seasons and ended in 2011.

In April 2011, she was cast in a guest role as Shelley Chamberlain, a grieving mother on a killing spree in the CBS series Criminal Minds. In October 2011, she was cast in a guest role as a kidnapped child's mother called Elizabeth Flint in the CBS series The Mentalist. In 2012, she landed the recurring role of Jackie Clarke in the Lifetime television series Army Wives and was quickly upgraded to series regular.

On August 12, 2015, Ties That Bind, the first original series from the Up Network, is scheduled to debut with Williams playing police detective Allison McLean. The series balances McLean's work and family.

Personal life

Williams married author Ajay Sahgal in 1996. The couple has three children: Kiran (born in 1998), Sarame (born in 2001), and Ravi (born in 2003). She told Marie Claire that she got breast implants when she was 19 and had them removed when she was 22. Williams speaks French and Spanish, and has volunteered with the Young Storytellers Program.

Filmography

Film

Television


