
#Article: Jesse Klaver
#Type: regular article

Jesse Feras Klaver (born May 1, 1986 in Roosendaal) is a Dutch politician. He has been a member of the House of Representatives since 2010, and he has served as leader of the GreenLeft party since May 12, 2015. Prior to this he had also been chair of the youth union of the Christelijk Nationaal Vakverbond.

Biography

Early life

His father has a Moroccan background and his mother has a mixed Dutch and Indonesian background. His grandparents played a large role in his upbringing. Between 1999 and 2004 he attended the vmbo at the Waldorf school Michael College in Prinsenbeek.

Between 2006 and 2009, he was member of the board of the DWARS, the youth organization of the GreenLeft. First, he was duo-chair for organization matters, later he was secretary and then he was elected chair. As chair, he supported the "freedom-loving course set by Femke Halsema" against the more communitarian elements within the party. In addition to serving in this function, he studied social work at the Avans University of Applied Sciences and the transition program for the master political science at the University of Amsterdam. He quit the transition program before finishing it.

On September 17, 2009 he was elected chair of the youth union of the CNV. As chair he announced he would put less emphasis on the Christian character of the CNV. He supported raising the retirement age to 67. On December 1, 2009 he was appointed to the Social Economic Council. Being 23 years old, he was the youngest member ever to sit on this council. In addition to chairing the CNV youth union, he co-authored the 2010 GreenLeft election manifesto; he was member of the board of the Christian Social Youth Congress and he was founder of the climate NGO Youth Copenhagen Coalition.

Political career

In 2010 Klaver was placed seventh on the list of the GreenLeft for the 2010 elections. The GreenLeft won ten seats. Klaver became spokesperson social affairs, employment, education and sport. His maiden speech concerned higher education.

In 2010 he was nominated as "political talent of the year" by political journalists. For the 2012 elections Klaver headed the campaign team of the GreenLeft and he was fourth on the list of candidates of the GreenLeft. This was enough to be elected, as the GreenLeft got exactly four seats. His TEDtalk in the late-night talk show Pauw & Witteman in January 2013, was chosen as the best of five young politicians.

In 2013 he co-authored the memo "Mooi Nederland" ("Beautiful Netherlands") with Lutz Jacobi (PvdA) and Stientje van Veldhoven (D66) which set out to protect nature, the landscape, flora and fauna. In 2013 he authored a private member's bill which through transparency sought to reduce food spillage. In 2014 he authored the proposal "Kansen voor kinderen voor het vmbo" ("Chances for Children in pre-vocational education").

Klaver received international attention for opposing tax evasion in 2013. Klaver co-authored the agreement on the student benefit with the minister of Education Jet Bussemaker and spokespersons of the VVD, D66, PvdA.

On May 12, 2015 party leader Bram van Ojik announced that Klaver would be taking over party leadership effective immediately. Until that point, Klaver had acted as a spokesperson for finance, agriculture, nature, animal welfare, education, culture and science. He is member of parliamentary committees on foreign affairs, defense, European affairs, economic affairs, finance, education, budgetary control, social affairs, health and procedural affairs.

Personal life

Klaver married on May 3, 2013. He has one son.


