
#Article: Autumn Reeser
#Type: regular article

Autumn Reeser (born September 21, 1980) is an American actress. She is best known for her roles as Taylor Townsend on the Fox series The O.C., and Lizzie Grant on HBO's Entourage.

Early life and education

Reeser was born in La Jolla, California, the daughter of Kim (née Handel) and Tom Reeser. Reeser performed musical theater in her hometown from the age of six until she left at seventeen. After graduating from Carlsbad High School, she moved to Los Angeles to study at UCLA. She graduated from UCLA in 2004. She also studied acting at the Beverly Hills Playhouse acting school.Reeser lives in Hollywood, California. She enjoys scrapbooking, painting, and playing with her Papillon dog named Gatsby after the book The Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald.

Career

Reeser is perhaps best known for her character Taylor Townsend on popular television series, The O.C.. She first appeared during the third season and joined as a regular cast member the following season. In addition to The O.C., Reeser has appeared on numerous television shows including HBO's Entourage, WB's Maybe It's Me, ABC's Complete Savages, WB's Grounded for Life, FX Network's It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia, ABC's Pushing Daisies, Fox's Human Target, CBS's Ghost Whisperer, TNT's Raising the Bar, The CW pilot The World According to Barnes, and the ABC Family's October film Nature of the Beast. Additionally, Reeser played the starring role of Phoebe Valentine, Goddess of the Oracle at Delphi, in the CW Network series Valentine. Reeser also appeared in the ABC television series No Ordinary Family during the 2010-11 season. Reeser co-starred in the short-lived military drama Last Resort during the 2012-2013 season.

She has also appeared in a number of films including the 2008 sequel of a 1980s film, Lost Boys: The Tribe, Smokin' Aces 2: Assassins' Ball, The Girl Next Door, and a movie musical by the High School Musical producers, called The American Mall.

Reeser has also appeared in Internet projects, including four YouTube trailers for the novel Celebutantes as the book's narrator Lola Santisi and as a guest-star on The Bannen Way, a serial action show created by her husband, Jesse Warren.

Maxim ranked Reeser as the 57th most beautiful woman in the world in 2006. She also appeared on the cover of the December 2006 issue of Stuff magazine (U.S. version). Reeser is a spokesperson for Clean & Clear.

Reeser appears regularly in the Thrilling Adventure Hour, a staged show in the style of old-time radio. She is the star of the segment "Amelia Earhart: Fearless Flyer".

In the fall of 2010, she starred in the concert revue For The Record: Quentin Tarantino in Los Angeles.

Reeser also contributed to the 2008 video game Command & Conquer: Red Alert 3, voicing Commander Lissette Hanley of the Allied Nations. Her character also appears in the demo.

Personal life

On May 9, 2009, Reeser married writer/director Jesse Warren in Ojai, California. They have two sons: Finneus James Warren, born on May 10, 2011 and Dashiell Ford Warren, born on November 25, 2013. In November 2014, Reeser filed for divorce from Warren, citing irreconcilable differences.

Filmography


