
#Article: Mónica Cruz
#Type: regular article

Mónica Cruz Sánchez (born March 16, 1977) is a Spanish actress and dancer. She is the younger sister of actress Penélope Cruz.

Early life

Mónica Cruz Sánchez was born in Alcobendas, Madrid, Spain, the daughter of Encarna Sánchez, a hairdresser, and Eduardo Cruz, a retailer and auto mechanic. Throughout her childhood, Cruz lived in Alcobendas, a working-class town. Cruz is the middle child of three siblings ; she has an older sister, Penélope, who is an actress, and a younger brother, Eduardo (born in 1986), who is a singer. Her parents divorced in 1999 and her father remarried Carmen Moreno in 2003. Moreno gave birth to a baby girl, Salma Cruz, on February 24, 2012. Penélope and Mónica distinguished themselves as promising young dancers and they both received professional instruction; Penélope attended Spain’s National Conservatory, while Mónica enrolled in The Royal Academy of the Dance to study traditional ballet and flamenco.

Career

Upon graduating from the academy, Mónica joined Joaquín Cortés’ flamenco dance company. She stayed with the company for seven years until, in 2002, she left dancing to pursue a career as an actress. By 2005, Mónica starred in the Spanish television show Un Paso Adelante alongside Beatriz Luengo, Miguel Ángel Muñoz, Pablo Puyol and Silvia Marty.

In 2010, her sister Penélope was pregnant while filming scenes for Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides. Towards the latter half of shooting, the appearance of her pregnancy was very apparent so the filmmakers had to figure methods of shooting around it. This included shooting Penélope in close up scenes while hiring Mónica to stand-in for long distance scenes as she appeared identical to her sister.

Personal life

Cruz dated Spanish actor and singer Miguel Ángel Muñoz for three years. While they were dating, she got a tattoo of Muñoz's initials inside her left wrist. She then dated Argentinian actor Fabián Mazzei for about a year. She was also in a relationship with an Italian stunt man, Paolo, from 2007 to 2010. In 2011, she dated Spanish actor Álex González. 

Cruz gave birth to her first child, a daughter named Antonella Cruz Sánchez on May 14, 2013. Her daughter was conceived via artificial insemination and has no legal father.

Her father Eduardo Cruz died of a heart attack at his home in Spain on June 18, 2015, at age 62.

Filmography


