
#Article: Katie Price
#Type: regular article

Katie Price (born 22 May 1978), previously known by the pseudonym Jordan, is an English television personality and glamour model.

Her time as topless female glamour model in a pictorial Page 3 in British tabloid newspaper The Sun shot Price into the limelight. Her placement in the public spotlight allowed Price to expand into a variety of different industries including television, books, fashion and music.

Price has had many highly publicised relationships and has been married three times, to singer Peter Andre (2005-2009), to professional fighter Alex Reid (2010-2011) and to builder and part-time stripper Kieran Hayler (2013-). In April 2012, Price's net worth was estimated at £45 million.

Early life

Born in 1978 in Brighton, East Sussex, southeast England, Katie Price was the only child of Amy (née Charlier) and Ray Infield. Her father left the family when she was four, and in 1988 her mother married builder Paul Price, after which she acquired the surname Price. From two of her mother's other's marriages, she has an older half-brother named Daniel and a younger half-sister named Sophie. Her maternal grandmother was Jewish, but she is not religious.

Price attended Blatchington Mill School and, although not an academic student, she excelled at sport, swimming for Sussex in regional competitions. During her childhood, she also developed a passion for horses and horse-riding. At age six, Price was molested by a man in a park's bushes. She began modelling as a child, and at 13 she modelled for a clothing line—although, unknown to her, the project's photographer was a convicted paedophile and insisted on shooting her in her underwear. Price left school at 16 in 1994.

Career

Modelling

At a friend's suggestion, Price had professional photographs taken and decided to pursue a modelling career. The pictures were sent to a modelling agency in London, and in 1996 she was offered a job at Page 3, a topless female glamour model pictorial in British tabloid newspaper The Sun. She adopted the name Jordan in 1996 and made frequent appearances as a model on both Page Three and in men's lifestyle magazines.

As Jordan, Price was famed for her surgically enhanced breasts. At 19 she had the first in a succession of breast-enhancement surgeries, increasing her natural 32B to a 32FF. Unhappy with her breasts from an early age and despite her family's objections, she went ahead with the procedure because she felt that, as a glamour model, she did not look "as sexy or as womanly" as other models. She has since had many enhancements, as well as reductions, on her breasts in addition to later having liposuction on her hips and thighs, fat implanted into her lips to boost her pout, and a nose job. She told a reporter, "Some people may be famous for creating a pencil sharpener. I'm famous for my tits." Price was later barred from Page Three in The Sun with their adoption of a policy to only use "all natural" models.

She continued modelling as Jordan nonetheless and regularly appeared in the Daily Star, FHM, the British edition of Playboy, Nuts, Maxim, Loaded, Vogue and Esquire and also ran as a candidate in Stretford and Urmston during the British General Election in 2001; her comical election campaign had the slogan "For a Bigger and Betta Future" and promised free breast implants, more nudist beaches, and a ban on parking tickets to her constituents. She ended up winning 713 votes, 1.8% of the votes cast. In 2002, she appeared on the September cover of the American edition of Playboy magazine. In October 2003, Price appeared in an advertising campaign for the supermarket chain Kwik Save. To publicise the chain's promotion to cut the prices of their leading lines in half, Price was sawn in half by magician Peter McCahon.

Price continues to model today, though she has dropped the name Jordan and no longer does glamour modelling.

Television

Price made cameo appearances as herself in the television dramas Dream Team and Footballers Wives in 2004. Price also appeared on Top Gears "Star in a Reasonably Priced Car" in 2004. She completed the lap in one minute and fifty-two seconds.

Price appeared on The Big Breakfast in her earlier career and was a guest host on the first series of The Friday Night Project. In December 2005, she released an exercise fitness DVD, The Jordan Workout, featuring "The Juice Master" Jason Vale. In 2007, Price hosted the short-lived late-night chat show Katie & Peter: Unleashed with her former husband Peter Andre. The eight-episode series spanned less than two months, proving very unpopular with viewers.

Price was a contestant on the third series of Im a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!, a reality television series where a group of celebrities live together in a jungle environment with few luxuries, between the months of January and February in 2004. It was there that she met Peter Andre whom she would eventually marry and later divorce. In November 2009, Price made a return visit to Im a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! in its ninth series. Presenters Ant & Dec insinuated during the broadcast that the surprise of Prices return had been ruined by the media. Whilst in the jungle, the public repeatedly voted Price to undertake each and every "Bush Tucker Trial" challenge. After it had been announced that Price had been selected for her seventh consecutive trial, she decided to quit the show and left one week after her arrival.

She has also been the subject of many reality television series that chronicle her often chaotic domestic life. This started with a trio of Channel 4 documentaries by film-maker Richard Macer: Jordan: The Truth About Me (2002), Jordan: The Model Mum and Jordan: You Dont Even Know Me (both 2004), and was followed Jordan Gets Even on Five in 2004. She later appeared in the documentary Jordan: Living With a Dream  (Channel 4) and then launched the Katie & Peter franchise on ITV2 which documented the lives of Price and former husband Peter Andre. This franchise included several fly-on-the-wall reality series which comprised When Jordan Met Peter, Jordan & Peter: Laid Bare and Jordan & Peter: Marriage and Mayhem between 2004 and 2005; Katie & Peter: The Next Chapter, Katie & Peter: The Baby Diaries and Katie & Peter: Unleashed in 2007; Katie & Peter: Down Under and Katie & Peter: African Adventures in 2008; and Katie & Peter: Stateside in 2009. The pairs separation in 2009 resulted in their individual shows being recorded: What Katie Did Next continued on ITV2 until 2011. Her most recent documentary series currently airs on Sky Living under the name Katie.Price danced with her then boyfriend Leandro Penna on the Argentine television programme Bailando por un Sueño 2012, a spin-off of Strictly Come Dancing.

In 2015, Price appeared on the fifteenth series of Celebrity Big Brother. After two contestants had been ejected, Price entered as a latecomer. She had been previously offered to appear on the show. On 6 February 2015, Price finished as the winner of the series, beating Katie Hopkins into first place. Moreover, Katie Price sets a new record as one of only two housemates, alongside Brian Belo, on Big Brother UK or Celebrity Big Brother to win the series after entering as a latecomer and is currently the only female to do so, also making her the first celebrity housemate to win, who entered late. Price entered the house nine days after the original fourteen housemates, and left the house 22 days later as the winner.

Writing

Price has also established herself in the publishing industry, despite having her work ghostwritten by Rebecca Farnworth. She released the first of four autobiographies Being Jordan in May 2004. Initially turned down by the mainstream publishing houses after demanding a £1 million advance, she was eventually signed up by small independent publisher John Blake for £10,000 plus royalties. In a departure from industry norms, she conducted a 10-day book-signing tour which provoked enough interest - contrary to expectations and almost exclusively female - to propel her to first position in the Nielsen BookScan hardback sales chart and to sell 97,090 copies in one year; and over 1,000,000 as of January 2007. Her second autobiography, A Whole New World, was published in January 2006. It reached number two in the hardback general category and sold 198,105 copies by 1 April 2006.

Price's third autobiography, Pushed to the Limit, was released in February 2008, and in October 2010 she released her fourth one, You Only Live Once, which offers personal insight into her life between the start of 2008 and the summer of 2010, documenting her split from Andre and leading up to her marriage to Alex Reid. She dedicates the book to Andre, amongst other family members and close friends, in the "hope he find the happiness has always been searching for". She also thanks him for taking her on a journey of self-discovery.

Her first ghost-written novel, Angel, about a young woman who becomes a model, was published in July 2006, and sold 300,000 copies in six weeks. Her second ghost-written novel, Crystal, about a young woman's efforts to become a singer, sold 159,407 copies during the first three months after its release in June 2007. All four books were ghost-written by Rebecca Farnworth. In July 2008, Price released her third novel, Angel Uncovered. In July 2009, Price released a novel entitled Sapphire which was number 1 on the hardback fiction chart for four consecutive weeks and sold 42,215 copies in its first two weeks in the UK alone. Price released her fifth novel, Paradise, in July 2010.

In 2006 Price signed a £300,000 advance with Random House for Katie Price's Perfect Ponies, a series of children's books, with the first 6 released in 2007. Three more books have been released throughout 2008. A title from that series, My Pony Care Book, was nominated for the WH Smith's Children's Book of the Year. In 2008, she released a new children's book series entitled Mermaids & Pirates, with six in the series. Four more are expected for release in April 2008.

Price used to write a regular advice column in OK! magazine, but she decided not to renew her contract in late 2009. In 2012, she landed her own column in The Sun on Sunday.

Music

Price was one of the contestants in the selection process of finding a representative for the United Kingdom at the 2005 Eurovision Song Contest. The selection process, named Making Your Mind Up, was broadcast live on television in March 2005. Price sang a song titled "Not Just Anybody" wearing a skin-tight pink catsuit. She came in second place behind winner Javine. Price later revealed while in the Celebrity Big Brother house that her only regret in life was auditioning for Eurovision.

Price, with Peter Andre, released A Whole New World, a duet album, in November 2006. All sales of the album went to their chosen charities affiliated with the many health conditions of her eldest son, Harvey. The album debuted at number twenty on the UK Albums Chart and achieved platinum status.

In July 2010, Price released "Free to Love Again", a non-album single. About the release, she explained: "I'm not a singer, this is just something that I'm doing for fun. It's not like I'm worried about getting a chart position or number one, this is purely for fun. Whether people like it or not, I'm doing it." The single had scarce promotion or radio play and was negatively received by contemporary critics. It charted at number sixty on the UK Singles Chart and was only supported by performances on GMTV and at various London nightclubs. On all occasions, she admitted that she had been lip-synching.

Fashion and beauty

In November 2006, Price launched The Katie Price Lingerie Collection in conjunction with Panache, available exclusively at Asda stores, as well as a follow-up jewellery deal with Argos.

In 2007, Price was announced as the new face of Foxy Bingo and launched a hair care range at Superdrug.

She also brought out her first perfume, 'Stunning', in August which was produced, distributed and marketed by Jigsaw ESL. Her second perfume, 'Besotted', was released in September 2008. November 2007 saw Price releasing her 'Jordan' hair care electrical range at Superdrug. There was a hairdryer, straighteners and curlers. She released a second, similar range in November 2008 under the name 'Katie Price', to somewhat differing design. Katie Price's third fragrance was called Precious Love.

In 2012, Katie attended The Girls' Day Out Show on Friday 30 November to promote her perfume and do signings for her fans at The London Perfume Company stand.

Equestrian clothing range

In 2008, Price signed a deal with Derby House to launch her equestrian range of clothing named 'KP Equestrian'. On 23 March 2008, Price launched her springwear of KP Equestrian as well as KP Pony, which is for children.

In 2009 Price was named as the Patron of a charity polo match that was played at an Estate, near Epping, Essex. She was photographed arriving by helicopter, wearing a mini-dress and stiletto heels. Ex-boyfriend Dane Bowers and Jade Goody's widower Jack Tweed also attended.

Controversy

Price and Andre were criticised for sexually explicit behaviour in their reality show. In taping the show the couple re-enacted sex scenes (while fully clothed) and had frank discussions about sex.

The couple were libelled by an ex-employee and later accepted damages from the News of the World newspaper after it published the accusations about their parental abilities.

In May 2009, three days after her announced separation from Andre, her management company of five years said that they would no longer represent her. They chose to represent Andre instead.

In 2008, Price was refused admission to Guards Polo Club for the most prestigious day in the international Polo Season and a highlight of the British Social Season, the Hurlingham Polo Cartier International match for the Coronation Cup, presented by Prince Charles. She attempted to circumvent this by buying a table at the Chinawhite marquee for £6,000 through her agent, but this was refused as well. This was despite a violent criminal who assaulted an elderly couple was allowed permission. An anonymous source said "Jordan has been told she is not welcome. Polo is very prestigious and there are certain names they want there and others they definitely don't. Jordan is still too 'chavvy' as far as Cartier is concerned. Having Jordan there just wouldn't be in keeping with Cartier's image. If she turns up she will not be allowed access".

Personal life

Relationships

Price briefly dated several celebrities and sports stars including footballers Teddy Sheringham, Dwight Yorke, singer Gareth Gates, and Warren Furman (Ace from the television series Gladiators). During her much-publicised relationship with Dane Bowers of the boy band Another Level, she had an abortion after discovering he had cheated on her. A pornographic video the couple made together was stolen from their flat in 1999 and subsequently became a popular celebrity sex tape.

Price and Peter Andre got together after spending time on I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!, and they married in September 2005 at Highclere Castle, Hampshire. In May 2009 they announced that they were separating. It was Andre's decision to leave her.In a televised interview with Piers Morgan in July 2009, Price claimed that their break-up was partly due to Andre's jealousy of her relationship with dressage trainer Andrew Gould, which she claimed was entirely platonic, but it finally ended when she was photographed in a Bristol nightclub after she and Andre had agreed that they would not go out without each other. Andre didn't trust Katie when she drunk alcohol hence they had made the pact. She revealed that she had suffered a miscarriage before the split but still ran the London Marathon so as not to let her charities down. She was still recovering from the miscarriage. They were officially divorced on 8 September 2009, two days before what would have been their fourth wedding anniversary.

In July 2009, Price began dating MMA fighter and former Hollyoaks actor Alex Reid. On 2 February 2010, Price married Reid in a private ceremony in Las Vegas at the chapel in the Wynn Hotel, although some press reports claimed their wedding was not legal. They later formally married in a church in the UK; the ceremony was filmed for her TV series. They separated in January 2011.

Price began dating Argentine model Leandro Penna after meeting him at the Oscars. In April 2011 they were visiting his parents in Córdoba Province in Argentina, their car ran into a pair of horses. Price announced her engagement to Penna in April 2012. In October 2012 Price said she and Penna had "mutually" decided to end their relationship.

She married her third husband, builder and part-time stripper Kieran Hayler, at the Sandals Royal Bahamian Resort and Spa in the Bahamas on 16 January 2013. Hayler proposed on Christmas Day 2012. Price is very family-oriented and has said that she wishes to have "at least seven children" shortly after the birth of her fifth child in 2014. Price declared that she planned to divorce Hayler after he had affairs with two of Price's close friends. They have now reconciled and he was with Price at the birth of their daughter, Bunny.

Children

Katie Price gave birth to her first child, son Harvey, in Brighton in May 2002. Harvey's father is former footballer Dwight Yorke. Jordan has said she had intended to have at least one birth shown live over the Internet, but she later decided to keep it private. He was found to be blind, having a condition known as septo-optic dysplasia, meaning that the development of his optic nerve was unpredictable. As he has matured, she has also discovered that he is on the autistic spectrum, gains weight easily due to suffering from Prader-Willi syndrome, and finds walking difficult.

In June 2005, she gave birth by Caesarean section to her second son, Junior Savva Andreas Andre, in Westminster, London. In June 2007, she gave birth to her third child, daughter Princess Tiaamii Crystal Esther Andre.

In August 2013, Price gave birth to her fourth child, a boy named Jett Riviera. He was born eight weeks premature by emergency Caesarean. On 4 August 2014, she gave birth to a second daughter named Bunny two weeks prematurely. She is Price's fifth child; her second by Hayler.

Surgery

In 2002, Price was treated for a leiomyosarcoma on her finger. The cancerous tumour was removed at a Nuffield Hospital near her Brighton home.

In December 2007, Price underwent surgery in the United States to reduce the size of her breast implants and also had rhinoplasty. However, she was not happy with the results of her breast implants, so returned to Beverly Hills, California in July 2008 for corrective surgery. She returned to the United Kingdom with much smaller size 32C breasts.

Legal issues

In September 2009, Price claimed that she had previously been raped by a "famous celebrity", but had not reported the incident. Price insisted that she would "absolutely never" reveal who the attacker was. Surrey Police stated that they had not contacted Price: "No allegation of rape has been made and Miss Price will not be making a statement to police".

Discography

	Albums

	Singles

Publications

Autobiographies

	Being Jordan (2004)

	A Whole New World (2006)

	Pushed to the Limit (2008)

	You Only Live Once (2010)

	Love, Lipstick and Lies (2013)

Novels

	Angel (2006)

	Crystal (2007)

	Angel Uncovered (2008)

	Sapphire (2009)

	Paradise (2010)

	The Comeback Girl (2011)

	Santa Baby (2011)

	In the Name of Love (2012)

	 He's the One (2013)

	 Make My Wish Come True (2014)

Children

	Perfect Ponies (2007-10)

	 Here Comes the Bride, Little Treasures, Fancy Dress Ponies, Pony Club Weekend, The New Best Friend, Ponies to the Rescue, My Pony Care Book, Star Ponies, Pony 'n' Pooch, Pony in Disguise, Stage Fright!, Secrets and Surprises, Wild West Weekend (in order of publication date)

	Mermaids & Pirates (2008-10)

	Follow the Fish, I Spy, Let's Build a Sandcastle, A Sunny Day, Telescope Overboard, Time for a Picnic, All Around, Hide and Seek, Katie the Mermaid, Katie's Day, Peter's Friends, Pirate Olympics (in order of publication date)

Fashion

	Standing Out (2009)

Awards and nominations

See also

	 List of glamour models


