
#Article: Bridgette Wilson
#Type: regular article

Bridgette Leann Wilson-Sampras (born September 25, 1973) is an American actress, singer, model, and Miss Teen USA award winner. Wilson began her career as an actress after being crowned Miss Teen USA in 1990, playing the character of Lisa Fenimore on the soap opera Santa Barbara between 1990 and 1992.

She made her film debut in appearances in several '90s films, including Higher Learning (1995), and Billy Madison (1995). She later had roles in House on Haunted Hill (1999), The Wedding Planner (2001), and Shopgirl (2005).

Wilson is married to professional tennis player Pete Sampras, with whom she has two sons.

Early life

Wilson was born and raised in the small coastal town of Gold Beach, Oregon, the daughter of Kathy and Dale Wilson. While in high school, she competed on the school's volleyball team. She was crowned Miss Teen USA in 1990 at the age of fifteen in Biloxi, Mississippi, and was the second contender from Oregon to win the crown. She graduated from Gold Beach High School in 1991.

Career

After her reign as Miss Teen USA, Wilson became an actress and appeared in Santa Barbara, Saved By The Bell, The Last Action Hero (as Jack Slater's daughter Whitney), Higher Learning (cameo as a university student), Billy Madison (playing Adam Sandler's character's teacher/girlfriend Veronica Vaughn), Mortal Kombat (playing Sonya Blade), Nixon (a cameo as a nightclub performer), I Know What You Did Last Summer (as Sarah Michelle Gellar's character's ill-fated elder sister), House on Haunted Hill (as Melissa Marr), Buying the Cow, The Suburbans, Love Stinks, Nevada, Sweet Evil (as a psychopathic surrogate mother), Extreme Ops (as a world-champion snowboarder) and The Wedding Planner. Wilson also appeared on an episode of CSI Miami as a woman whose husband is killed by a package delivered to their house.

Wilson has starred in The Rocky Horror Show (off-Broadway) and was a judge on the 2006 Miss Universe competition. Wilson is also a singer, and was featured on Tommy Shane Steiner's debut album Then Came the Night, performing a spoken-word part in "What We're Gonna Do About It". This song reached number 43 on the Billboard Hot Country Songs charts in 2002.

Personal life

Wilson married former ATP professional tennis player Pete Sampras on September 30, 2000. They have two sons, Christian Charles Sampras (b. November 21, 2002) and Ryan Nikolaos Sampras (b. July 29, 2005). They purchased a home in Bel Air, California in 2014.

Filmography

Discography

Albums

Guest singles


