
#Article: Ivanka Trump
#Type: regular article

Ivanka Marie Trump (born October 30, 1981) is an American businesswoman, writer, and former model, the daughter of real estate magnate Donald Trump. In her role as Executive Vice President of Development & Acquisitions at the Trump Organization, Trump is involved with all aspects of the company's real estate and hotel management initiatives. She is the principal of Ivanka Trump Fine Jewelry. The Ivanka Trump Lifestyle Collection also includes fragrance, footwear, handbags, outerwear and eyewear collections.

Early life

Ivanka Trump was born in Manhattan, to Donald John Trump and his Czech-born wife Ivana Marie Zelníčková. Her parents divorced in 1991, when she was about 10 years old. She has two brothers, Donald Jr. and Eric; a half sister, Tiffany and half brother, Barron; 

Education

Trump attended the Chapin School in New York until age 15, then transferred to and graduated from Choate Rosemary Hall in Wallingford, Connecticut.  She spent two years at Georgetown University, then transferred to the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania (her father's alma mater), graduating cum laude in 2004 with a B.S. in Economics.

Career

Business

Before joining the family business, Trump worked for Forest City Enterprises, and joined forces with Dynamic Diamond Corp., a diamond trading company sightholder, to design and introduce a line of jewelry at the brand's first flagship retail store called Ivanka Trump on Madison Avenue.

Trump is currently Executive Vice President of Development & Acquisitions at the Trump Organization. On the work drive among her and her siblings, she has stated, "I look at my brothers and myself and I’m, like, really proud of the fact that nobody’s, like, totally fucked-up. Nobody’s a drug addict, nobody’s driving around chasing women, snorting coke."

She has also released her own line of handbags and footwear. Trump serves on the Board of 100 Women in Hedge Funds, an industry organization which provides support to women professionals in finance.

Modeling

Trump's first cover was a 1997 issue of Seventeen. Since then, she has made her way down fashion runways for Versace, Marc Bouwer and Thierry Mugler. She has done advertisement campaigns for Tommy Hilfiger and Sassoon Jeans and was featured on the cover of Stuff in August 2006 and again in September 2007. She has been featured on the covers of Forbes, Golf Magazine, Avenue, Elle Mexico and Top Choice Magazine and in the October 2007 issue of Harper's Bazaar. She has also featured many times in Love FMD magazine. 

She placed Number 83 in the 2007 Maxim Hot 100. She has also placed Number 99 in the Top 99 Women of 2007 and then at 84 in the 2008 edition on AskMen.com. Trump's page in the Fashion Model Directory provides complete professional details of her prior work in that domain.

Television appearances

The Apprentice

In 2006, she filled in for Carolyn Kepcher on five episodes of her father's television program The Apprentice 5, first appearing to help judge the Gillette task in week 2. Like Kepcher, Trump visited the site of the tasks and spoke to the teams, asking them pointed questions. She also evaluated contestants in the boardroom, pointing out critical errors and rebutting excuses they offered for losing the tasks. Though initially unsympathetic to the contestants, Trump later said, "Whenever I see their breakdowns, I understand. They go virtually 24 hours a day, and each task takes about three days. Unless they win, they don't get a day off... It's an incredible amount of work..."Trump now collaborates with season 5 winner Sean Yazbeck on his winner's project of choice, Trump SoHo Hotel-Condominium.

Trump replaced Carolyn Kepcher as a primary boardroom judge during the Apprentice 6 and The Celebrity Apprentice.

Other TV appearances

In 1997, she hosted the Miss Teen USA Pageant, which is partially owned by her father, Donald Trump. In 2003, she was featured in Born Rich, a documentary about the experience of growing up as a child in one of the world's most affluent families. During an April 2006 appearance on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, Jay Leno commented that he could hear her father's influence and inflections in her. David Letterman also made a similar comment when she appeared on Late Show with David Letterman on April 24, 2007.

Trump was a featured guest-judge on Project Runway Season 3. She was also at a Milwaukee, Wisconsin, event in April 2007 called the Creating Wealth Summit in which she spoke for about 30 minutes about making money and her latest projects. She has been offered to appear on The Bachelorette, but she declined. On October 25, 2010, Trump along with her husband, Jared Kushner, showed up on Season 4 Episode 6 of Gossip Girl portraying themselves for a brief time.

Writing

Ivanka Trump wrote a book called The Trump Card: Playing to Win in Work and Life, which was published in October 2009.

Personal life

	Relationships and family

During college, she was in a nearly four-year relationship with Greg Hirsch. From 2001-2005, she was in a three and a half year relationship with James "Bingo" Gubelmann. In 2007 she started dating American-Jewish businessman Jared Kushner. Jared's father Charles Kushner owns Kushner Properties and Jared shares in the ownership. Jared is also the owner of The New York Observer in Bedminster, New Jersey. The couple married in a Jewish ceremony on October 25, 2009, and have two children: daughter Arabella Rose Kushner (born July 2011) and son Joseph Frederick Kushner (born October 2013). On September 24, 2015, Trump announced she and her husband are expecting their third child, due in early 2016.

She is a close friend of Chelsea Clinton, who says of her: "There's nothing skin-deep about Ivanka. And I think that's a real tribute to her because certainly anyone as gorgeous as she is could have probably gone quite far being skin-deep."

	Religion

In July 2009, after studying with Rabbi Elie Weinstock from the Modern Orthodox Ramaz School, Trump had an Orthodox conversion to Judaism and took the name Yael. She subsequently keeps to a kosher diet and observes Shabbat, saying in 2015: "We're pretty observant... It's been such a great life decision for me... I really find that with Judaism, it creates an amazing blueprint for family connectivity. From Friday to Saturday we don't do anything but hang out with one another. We don't make phone calls."

	Politics

In 2007, Trump donated $1,000 to the presidential campaign of Hillary Clinton. In 2012, Trump endorsed Mitt Romney for president. In 2013, Trump and her husband hosted a fundraiser for Cory Booker. The couple bundled more than $40,000 for Booker's U.S. Senate campaign.

Awards

	 Voted Top Choice Awards Businesswoman of the Year in 2012

Published works


