
#Article: Bridget Regan
#Type: regular article

Bridget Catherine Regan (born February 3, 1982) is an American actress known for portrayals such as Kahlan Amnell in the television series Legend of the Seeker and Rebecca Lowe/Rachel Turner in White Collar.

Career

Since 2006, Regan has appeared in various television shows and in films. In 2008, she began filming Legend of the Seeker, a television show based on Terry Goodkind's Sword of Truth series. She portrayed Mother Confessor Kahlan Amnell, which earned her a cult following. Although her natural hair is red and curly, Regan dyed it dark brown and black, and occasionally chemically straightened it, for Legend of the Seeker. In 2009, she ventured into producing with Camp Wanatachi, a musical that ran in New York at La MaMa Experimental Theatre Club.

Regan was cast as a lead for the proposed television series The Frontier in 2012. In 2013, she began a recurring role in the fifth season of the USA Network crime drama White Collar as Rebecca Lowe/Rachel Turner, a brief love interest of Neal Caffrey. That same year, she joined the series Beauty & the Beast for a multi-episode arc as Alex, the ex-fiancée of Vincent Keller (Jay Ryan). Because the existence of Regan's character created a love triangle including Vincent and Catherine Chandler (Kristin Kreuk), this resulted in "rabid" hatred for Alex, and unpleasant Twitter messages for Regan, from fans who would rather Vincent be with Catherine. Regan stated, "I can't look at Twitter anymore! ... I understand why people don't like Alex, I suppose, but I can't really look anymore." In 2014, Regan was cast in a recurring role in Jane the Virgin, as Rose, a former lawyer who is involved in a complicated same-sex love affair. Also in 2014, she had a small role in John Wick, as Addy. 

Regan is popular with the comic book community, and, from 2009 to 2013, was commonly selected among comic book fans and critics as their ideal choice to portray Wonder Woman. In 2009, Rick Marshall of MTV stated, "In one of the most voted-on, yet lop-sided weekly polls we've ever conducted here on Splash Page, Legend of the Seeker actress Bridget Regan was voted fans' favored lady to bring DC's iconic Amazon warrior, Wonder Woman, to the big screen." Regan netted over 62 percent of the total vote, well ahead of well-known and lesser-known actresses. In 2013, ScreenRant's Andrew Dyce commented, "Casting Wonder Woman may sound like a tall order, but if you ask the online fan communities, Bridget Regan may be the name you hear more than any other." In 2014, Regan was cast in the recurring role of Dottie for 2015 in the comic book-based television series Agent Carter.

Personal life

Born in San Diego County, California, Regan grew up in an Irish American and Catholic family. She began acting as a child in North County productions of The Wizard of Oz at the La Paloma Theatre and Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat in her hometown of Carlsbad, California. She graduated from the University of North Carolina School of the Arts.

Regan is married to Eamon O'Sullivan, an assistant director she met in New Zealand while filming Legend of the Seeker. On December 27, 2010, she gave birth to their daughter Frankie Jean. The news was revealed via Twitter two days after the birth.

Filmography

Film

Television

Theatre


