
#Article: Lake Bell
#Type: regular article

Lake Siegel Bell (born March 24, 1979) is an American actress, writer and director.

She has starred in the television series Boston Legal (2004-06), Surface (2005-06), How to Make It in America (2010-11) and Childrens Hospital (2008-present) and in the films Over Her Dead Body (2008), What Happens in Vegas (2008), It's Complicated (2009), No Strings Attached (2011) and Million Dollar Arm (2014), Man Up (2015).

She wrote and directed the short film Worst Enemy, which debuted at the Sundance Film Festival in 2012, followed by her 2013 feature film directing debut In a World..., in which she also starred.

Early life

Bell was born in New York City. Her mother, Robin Bell, owns the design firm Robin Bell Design in New York. Her father is real estate developer Harvey Siegel, who bought the then-closed Virginia International Raceway and converted it into a racetrack country club, and who owned New Jersey Motorsports Park.

Bell's father is Jewish and her mother is Protestant. Bell has stated that she was raised in a "comically dysfunctional family."

Bell attended The Chapin School in New York and Westminster School in Simsbury, Connecticut. For part of her teenage years she lived in Vero Beach, Florida and attended Saint Edwards School. She attended Skidmore College in Saratoga Springs, New York, before transferring to Rose Bruford College in London.  There she acted in theatrical productions including The Seagull, The Children's Hour, Six Degrees of Separation, Light Shining in Buckinghamshire and The Pentecost.

Career

Actress

Bell began her career in 2002 with roles in the film Speakeasy, a film about two men who become unlikely friends after a minor traffic accident, and in 2 episodes of the medical TV drama ER. Her first significant roles came in 2003. After appearing in the psychological thriller I Love Your Work, she was cast alongside Jeff Goldblum as the female lead in the NBC television film War Stories and played Alicia Silverstones wisecracking best friend, Victoria Carlson, in NBCs comedy-drama series Miss Match. In 2004, Bell appeared in the wrestling film Slammed and made her debut as Sally Heep in the final four episodes of The Practice. Her character was carried over into the spinoff Boston Legal, where she was a regular cast member until she left the series in 2005.

Bell then played the lead role in the science fiction series Surface, which aired between September 2005 and May 2006. 2006 also saw her star in the film Rampage: The Hillside Strangler Murders about the Hillside Strangler of the late 1970s and return to Boston Legal for two episodes, reprising her role as Sally Heep, opposing counsel to Alan Shore (portrayed by James Spader). In 2008, she played the female lead in the thriller Under Still Waters, for which she won the Newport Beach Film Festival Award for Outstanding Performance in Acting, starred alongside Paul Rudd and Eva Longoria in the romantic comedy Over Her Dead Body, played Cameron Diazs characters best friend in the romantic comedy What Happens in Vegas and played the wife of Colin Farrells character in crime drama Pride and Glory.

She was also cast as the lead female role, Dr. Cat Black, in Rob Corddrys satirical comedy Childrens Hospital. The fourth season began airing in August 2012 and featured two episodes that were directed by Bell—the series premiere, "The Boy with the Pancakes Tattoo", a parody of The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo and the ninth episode, "A Kid Walks in to a Hospital".In 2009, Bell voiced the role of Dana Mercer in the video game Prototype, played Alec Baldwins wife in the romantic comedy Its Complicated and guest starred in an episode of the fourth season of the series Wainy Days. 2010 saw Bell voice a supporting role in Shrek Forever After, star in the satirical film Burning Palms, guest star in an episode of the second season of the sitcom The League and cast as a lead character in the HBO series How to Make It in America, which aired for two seasons from February 2010 to November 2011. Bell was to play Deputy Judy Hicks in Scream 4, but dropped out four days before filming due to scheduling conflicts, with the role going to Marley Shelton.

In 2011, Bell starred alongside Josh Lucas and Terrence Howard in the supernatural thriller Little Murder, played Ashton Kutchers boss in the romantic comedy No Strings Attached, a performance that won her critical praise and was called "scene-stealing," starred in the ensemble comedy A Good Old Fashioned Orgy and guest starred in an episode of the first season of Zooey Deschanels sitcom New Girl. Bell had a lead role alongside Kate Bosworth in the 2012 thriller Black Rock.

Writer and director

In 2010, Bell made her writing and directing début with the short film Worst Enemy, which starred Michaela Watkins, Matt Walsh and Lindsay Sloane. Her film débuted at the 2011 Sundance Film Festival and has also played at the Nantucket Film Festival, the Dallas International Film Festival, the Gen Art Film Festival and Aspen Shortsfest, winning the Tony Cox Award for Screenwriting in a Short Film from Nantucket and receiving a Shorts Jury Special Mention from Dallas. Her film led to her being named one of the "2012 Inspiring Filmmakers" by LUNAFEST.

Bell made her feature film debut at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival with In A World.... which she wrote and directed and in which she starred She describes the film as "a comedy about a female voice-over artist and family dysfunction and relationships. I’m obsessed with the voice-over world, so it makes sense for me." The film was picked up by Roadside Attractions and Sony.

In February 2014 she said her next project would be What's The Point, a film she will write and direct.

Modeling

Bell, who is considered a sex symbol, was 45th on Femme Fatales' list of the 50 Sexiest Women of 2003; came 6th on British Vogue's list of the 10 Best Dressed Women of 2007, was 32nd on Maxim's Hot 100 of 2008, was 44th on Maxim's Hot 100 of 2012 and 89th on AskMen's 99 Most Desirable Women of 2012. In 2007, Bell appeared in a photo shoot for GQ; in 2008 she appeared in a photo shoot for Marie Claire; in 2009 she modeled for Scott Caan, for his first book, Scott Caan Photographs, Vol. 1; and in 2011 she appeared in photo shoots for Elle, Los Angeles, Maxim and Esquire, the latter in conjunction with the website Me In My Place. In September 2011, Bell modeled at Pirelli's Fashion Week in Milan, Italy. For New York Fashion Week 2013, Bell modeled nude with strategic body painting (done by her husband) on the cover of New York shot by Mark Seliger. In April 2014, Bell appeared in Esquire for the second time.

Other activities

Bell has an automotive column in The Hollywood Reporter called Test Drive and is the magazine's automotive contributing editor.

Personal life

Bell and Colin Farrell, her co-star in Pride and Glory, dated for a time.

In 2011, Bell began dating Scott Campbell, an artist and tattoo artist. The two met when he played himself in an episode of the second season of How to Make It in America. The couple became engaged on Bell's birthday in March 2012 and were married on June 1, 2013 at The Marigny Opera House in New Orleans, Louisiana. In late October 2014, her representative confirmed that Bell had given birth to their daughter, Nova.

Filmography


