
#Article: Danielle Lloyd
#Type: regular article

Danielle Lloyd (formerly O'Hara; born 16 December 1983) is an English glamour model. A former Miss England (2004) and Miss Great Britain (2006), she first rose to prominence when she was stripped of her Miss Great Britain title after posing nude in the December 2006 edition of Playboy magazine.. Her title was reinstated in 2010. She won the celebrity edition of The Weakest Link in 2008 and Total Wipeout in 2010. Lloyd married footballer Jamie O'Hara in May 2012.

Early life

Lloyd was born in Liverpool, England, the daughter of Jackie and Arthur Lloyd, a bank clerk production operator Ford Motor co/ Jaguar Motor co, respectively. Lloyd claims she was bullied in school; however, the former headteacher Chris Yates, of Lloyd's old schools, St Hilda’s, claimed there was no bullying at his school. Upon finishing school, she decided to pursue a dual career in modelling and as a beautician specializing in massage. She is a former nail technician.

Just as she was beginning her modelling career, Lloyd was attacked by her boyfriend at the time. She was dragged from her moving car after an argument with him, suffering abrasions and severe bruising to her body and losing most of her hair.

Pageantry and early career

Lloyd was crowned Miss England on 17 July 2004, and competed at Miss World 2004. On 26 February 2006, Lloyd was named Miss Great Britain 2006.

On 2 November 2006, she was stripped of her title "following recent claims in the press and magazines and the publicity given on the Playboy website for their next issue", according to the Miss Great Britain website. On 11 January 2007, it was revealed that Lloyd was being sued by the Miss Great Britain company for breaking her contract and bringing the company into disrepute. The company was asking for full revelation of the sums she earned for the Playboy pictures, plus costs.

Lloyd appeared in FHM magazine and was a finalist of Miss Maxim 2006. She has had her 32AA breasts increased by surgery three times, and is now a 32DD. During her last operation, when her old implants were replaced with newer, larger ones, taking her from a 32D to a 32DD, surgeons removed a benign lump in her right breast. Lloyd was worried that it was cancer, but doctors assured her that the lump was harmless. She has revealed that her third operation will be her last, claiming that it is "pointless" going any bigger and that "People say I want to be the new Jordan, but I definitely don't! I want to be myself. I don't mind her boobs but I think they could only suit her."

In 2010, Lloyd's Miss Great Britain 2006 title was reinstated, as the organisers decided it was their fault that she had appeared in Playboy, rather than her own.

In 2006, Lloyd made an appearance on BBC One's Test the Nation. She revealed that she thought a statue of former Prime Minister Winston Churchill was a statue for the first black President. However, at the end of the show it was revealed that her IQ was 152, and she would go on to win a special episode of The Weakest Link.

Celebrity Big Brother 5

Lloyd joined Celebrity Big Brother on 3 January 2007, at the start of the series. Lloyd incurred significant negative publicity, which included comments by politicians and government ministers apparently about her, Jade Goody, and Jo O'Meara's interactions with rival housemate Shilpa Shetty. Shetty won the competition with 63% of the final vote. 

Post Celebrity Big Brother

As a result of publicity about the show, Lloyd lost six-figure modelling contracts with motorcycle insurance firm Bennetts and urban fashion label Rocawear. In 2009 she suffered a deep injury to her leg and another to her back that required 20 stitches after an attack in a nightclub. Staff told her to wait for an ambulance outside where she was photographed bleeding on the pavement by paparazzi.

Lloyd has also appeared on the cover of Maxim, Loaded, Nuts and Zoo several times, as well as featuring in FHM and Ice. She has also secured a contract as the face of Ladbrokes Poker.In 2007, Lloyd launched a mobile phone safety campaign after her own mobile was stolen in a Liverpool club. The "Keep It Safe & Secure" (KISS) campaign, backed by the National Mobile Phone Crime Unit encourages mobile users to take greater safety precautions when using their phone. In December 2007, Lloyd released a workout DVD entitled Keep Fit, Look Fit.

Throughout 2007 and 2008, Lloyd made numerous television appearances including a guest spot on ITV2's WAGs Boutique and the celebrity edition of Gladiators. She also participated in a Glamour Models Special of The Weakest Link, winning £8,950. Lloyd donated her winnings from both Celebrity Big Brother and The Weakest Link to the Linda McCartney Centre located at the Royal Liverpool University Hospital.

Lloyd appeared in her own documentary, Dangerous Love: A Comic Relief Special (first broadcast on 3 March 2009), which examined the subject of violence against females in teen relationships. In the programme, she described the abuse she received (including a broken cheekbone) during her turbulent relationship and visited organisations funded by Comic Relief.

On 2 January 2010, Lloyd participated in a celebrity edition of Total Wipeout. She cleared all the rounds and went on to win the entire competition. She raised £10,000 for the charity Guiding Light/The Lantern Project.

In December 2010, she appeared on a celebrity edition of Come Dine with Me on Channel 4. She received the highest average scores from the other contestants and won the competition. She donated her prize money to Bliss, the special care baby charity.

In 2010, Lloyd made her film debut in the English horror movie Cut.

In 2014, Lloyd participated in a celebrity show Splash! (UK TV series)

On 18 January 2015, Lloyd took part in celebrity talent show Get Your Act Together.

Personal life

On 1 December 2009, Lloyd announced that she and footballer Jamie O'Hara had become engaged. She had previously dated footballers Teddy Sheringham, Marcus Bent and Jermain Defoe, and was briefly engaged to pop-star DJ Ironik. On 11 July 2010, Lloyd gave birth to their son Archie O'Hara in London. On 13 July 2011, Lloyd gave birth to her second child, Harry James O'Hara. He was born 10 weeks early, weighing 4 lb 4oz. Lloyd and O'Hara were married on 26 May 2012, with Danielle announcing her name change on Twitter. In 2013, Danielle announced that she was pregnant with her third child, due in September. On 29 August 2013, Lloyd gave birth to her third child, a son called George.

On 26 May 2009, Lloyd was pictured lying on the pavement outside a nightclub, bloodied and clearly upset after an alleged unprovoked attack. She reportedly required emergency plastic surgery on a wound on her leg, after she claimed she was thrown onto a table full of glasses by two women. However no witnesses came forward, and to date no charges have been brought.

On 7 September 2014, Danielle announced that she had filed for divorce from her husband Jamie O'Hara after he had been seen out in public with one of her friends.

On 10 December 2014, Lloyd was granted a decree nisi for her two and a half years marriage to Jamie O'Hara.


