
#Article: Katherine Kelly Lang
#Type: regular article

Katherine Kelly Lang (born Katherine Kelly Wegeman on July 25, 1961) is an American actress. She is known for her role as Brooke Logan on the CBS Daytime soap opera The Bold and the Beautiful (1987-present).

Personal life

She was born in Hollywood and graduated from Beverly Hills High School. She is the daughter of Olympic ski-jumper Keith R. Wegeman and actress Judith Lang and the granddaughter of Oscar-winning cinematographer Charles Lang.

Lang was divorced twice. She is the mother of three children: Jeremy Skott Snider (born 1990), Julian Lang Snider (born 1992), Zoe Katrina D'Andrea (born 1997), and has a stepdaughter, Danyelle D'Andrea (born 1991).

On November 11, 2012, it was announced that Lang had filed for divorce, citing irreconciliable differences after 15 years of marriage. The divorce was finalized on June 2014.

Career

Langs first credit role was a movie called Skatetown, U.S.A. (1979), with Scott Baio, Maureen McCormick and Patrick Swayze. That was followed by guest roles in various television series such as the short-lived The Powers of Matthew Star and Masquerade and the longer-running Riptide, Happy Days, The Fall Guy, and HBOs 1st & Ten. Lang starred in the 1996 movie Subliminal Seduction. In 1985, Lang appeared in three music videos: Alabamas Theres No Way (where she played the love interest of Alabama lead singer Randy Owen), and The Beach Boys Getcha Back and its sequel "Its Getting Late".

In 1987, she was offered the role of blue-collar Brooke Logan on the soap opera The Bold and the Beautiful (B&B), and has been an integral part of the program ever since. Her love affair with Ridge Forrester (played by Ronn Moss) has been a key story arc for over 20 years, and a love triangle among Brooke, Ridge, and Taylor (Hunter Tylo) stretched across an entire decade. The shows 5,000th episode included only the four core characters: Brooke, Ridge, Stephanie and Eric. As of February 2015, Lang is one of only two actors to be on The Bold and the Beautiful throughout the series. The other is John McCook, who portrays Eric Forrester.

She appeared as her character, Brooke Logan on B&Bs sister show, The Young and the Restless in 1999. She interacted with Eric Braeden (Victor), Peter Bergman (Jack), and Eileen Davidson (Ashley). She previously appeared on Y&R as Gretchen in 1981. She returned to Y&R in July 2007 for a brief stint as Brooke. Her work on B&B has been recognized with seven Soap Opera Digest Award nominations, beginning in 1991 and most recently in 2005.

Crystal Chappell won a Daytime Emmy Award along with Lang, Hilary B. Smith, Galen Gering in the Outstanding Drama Series: New Approach category for producing Venice: The Series.

Lang will make an appearance as herself in the Australian soap opera Neighbours in 2016.

Awards and nominations


