
#Article: Lily Aldridge
#Type: regular article

Lily Maud Aldridge (born November 15, 1985) is an American model. She is a Victoria's Secret Angel and a Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue model, appearing as a rookie alongside Chrissy Teigen and Nina Agdal in 2014 for the cover of the issue's 50th anniversary.

Early life

Aldridge was born at Saint John's Hospital in Santa Monica, California, and grew up in a fashion-oriented family. She is the daughter of English artist Alan Aldridge and Playboy Playmate of the month Laura Lyons. Her siblings include half-sister Saffron Aldridge, who was a multiyear face of Ralph Lauren in the 1990s; half-brother Miles Aldridge, who is a fashion photographer and was married to model Kristen McMenamy from 1997 to 2013, and sister Ruby Aldridge, who was the face of Marc by Marc Jacobs.

Career

Print work

Aldridge started modelling at the age of 16, for Abercrombie & Fitch.Her advertising campaigns include Rocawear, Arden B., Rag and Bone, Shiatzy Chen, Bobbi Brown, Smashbox Cosmetics, Gap, Tommy Hilfiger, Coach, JCrew, Charles David, Levi's, J Brand, Accessorize.

She was also featured in the spring 2011 advertising campaign for clothing company Rag & bone, and served as a photographer for the very same campaign in the following season.

She was named the face of clothing company XOXO and the skincare company Proactiv in 2014. With Chanel Iman, she was the face of the Born Free Africa campaign for online retailer Shopbop.

Magazines

At the age of 17, Aldridge appeared on the cover of the August 2003 Spanish Vogue.Aldridge has appeared on the covers of French Glamour, Vogue Mexico, Elle Korea, Elle Brazil, Elle Vietnam, Talter, 10 magazine, S Moda, Esquire Mexico, Allure Russia and Net-A-Porter's online magazine, The Edit.

She has been featured in editorials for Glamour, Cosmopolitan, Teen Vogue, Elle Girl, Elle America, Elle Korea, American Vogue, British Vogue, Vogue Turkey, Galore, Harper's Bazaar, Lucky, Marie Claire, Vanidades and V magazine with her sister RubyIn March 2011, Aldridge documented her personal style for Vogue UK's "Today I'm Wearing" photo blog.

Aldridge made her Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue debut in 2014, as a covermodel alongside Chrissy Tiegen and Nina Agdal for the issue's 50th anniversary.

Velvet Tees

She has been the face of fashion label Velvet Tees since 2004. In 2013, Aldridge released her own clothing line with Velvet Tees called Lily Aldridge for Velvet.

Victoria's Secret

In 2009, Aldridge walked in her first Victoria's Secret Fashion Show. In 2010 she became a Victoria's Secret Angel and walked her second Victoria's Secret Fashion Show, in which she was given her wings for the first time. She has also walked the 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014 fashion shows.November 2, 2015 Victoria's Secret announced that Aldridge was selected for their 2015 show. Among other items she will show a special bra covered with diamonds and gold. The bra is called 'Fireworks' and has an estimated value of $2 million (€ 1.8 million). The lingerie show will be held December 8, 2015 in New York. 

In January 2011, Aldridge appeared on the cover of the February issue of British GQ with Lindsay Ellingson, Erin Heatherton, and Candice Swanepoel . In the same month, she appeared in an editorial for V Magazine with fellow angels Heatherton and Swanepoel.In October 2014, Aldridge appeared in British Vogue with fellow Victoria's Secret models Adriana Lima, Candice Swanepoel, Lais Ribeiro and Elsa Hosk.

Music videos

Aldridge has appeared in various music videos. In the year 2000, she made a cameo among Eminem, Snoop Dog, Dr. Dre and others on the music video "Break Stuff" of Limp Bizknit. In 2015, Aldridge appeared in the music video for "Bad Blood" by Taylor Swift, portraying an assassin called "Frostbyte". Aldridge also appeared in two Kings of Leon videos for "Use Somebody" and "Temple".

Personal life

On September 20, 2010, Us Magazine reported that Aldridge was engaged to Kings of Leon frontman Caleb Followill. They met in 2007 at the Coachella Festival. The couple married on May 12, 2011, at the San Ysidro Ranch in Montecito, California. Aldridge gave birth to their daughter, Dixie Pearl Followill, on June 21, 2012, in Nashville, Tennessee.

Aldridge is a close friend of singer Taylor Swift and made an appearance in the pop star's music video for "Bad Blood". She is also close friends with fellow Victoria's Secret Angel, Behati Prinsloo.


