
#Article: Nívea Stelmann
#Type: regular article

Nívea Stelmann Leôncio (born April 6, 1974 in Paraíba do Sul, Rio de Janeiro) is a Brazilian actress.

Biography

She was born and raised in the city of Paraíba do Sul, Rio de Janeiro, in the State of Rio de Janeiro.

Born to entrepreneur parents, Nivea, at 12 years old, wanted to become famous.

At an early age, she tried to convince her parents to allow her to go live on her own in the city of Rio de Janeiro At 16 years old, Nivea got permission to move to Rio, where she came to attended college pursuing a major in journalism, which she studied up to the third semester and never graduated.

Besides being a college student, Nivea was also a model for Ford Models and did television commercials.

Later on, Nívea started attending Performing Arts classes at the UNI-Rio.

Career

Shortly afterwards, Nivea passed a test to perform on the show Família Brasil, of defunct TV Manchete. In this work, his love interest was Danton Mello.

With the end of Família Brasil, TV Manchete, she returned to her classes at UNI-Rio.

Eventually, Nivea won the test for a part in the segment "Estrela por um Dia" on the tv show Domingão do Faustão. She won the contest and one month later, she was invited to perform in the novella Malhação in 1996. Wolf Maya, who was the director, gave her the role of Luana, a tennis teacher.

After her participation in Malhação ended, Nivea got the role of Carolaine in the novella A Indomada, written by Aguinaldo Silva. That role made Nívea Stelmann popular in her home country.

Later on, Nivea also participated in the novellas Era Uma Vez..., Suave Veneno, Uga-Uga, O Clone, Chocolate com Pimenta and Alma Gêmea, all from Rede Globo.

In 2002 Nivea starred the play Give Love a Chance, alongside Mário Frias, her husband at that time. The play was written by Heloise Périssé and directed by João Brandão.

In 2007, Nivea took part in the novella Sete Pecados. In October of that same year, she was chosen the queen of the rhythmists of the school of samba Renascer, a position she occupied for the next two years.

In 2008, she was part of the cast of the tv series Casos e Acasos on the episode Dicas de um Sedutor. Also in 2008, she did the children's play Cyrano, an adaptation by director Karen Acioly, inspired on the play Cyrano de Begerac by Edmond Rostand.

In 2009, she participated in the novella Cama de Gato, from Rede Globo.

Between 2009 and 2010, the actress starred in the theatres the musical play Um Lugar Chamado Recanto.

In 2011, Nivea participated in the novella Morde & Assopra, from Rede Globo, as Lavinia, a former prostitute.

In 2013, she returned to the theatres with the play Batalha de Arroz num Ringue para Dois, alongside actor Maurício Machado. In that same year, Nívea published her first book, Dedo Podre.

Marriage and motherhood

She started dating the singer and actor Mário Frias in 1998. They moved in together in 2001 and got officially married in 2003, in the city of Rio de Janeiro. On the night of September 11, 2004, their son, Miguel, was born. In November of 2005 the couple announced their divorce.

In July 2007 she married the tv executive Eduardo Azer, a former boyfriend from her teenage years. Their marriage ended in divorced in October 2008.

On July 17, 2013, Nivea married businessman Marcus Rocha. In August 2013, she announces through her Twitter account that she's pregnant with her second child. On March 23 2014, Nívea gave birth to Bruna, her first child with husband Marcus, in Rio de Janeiro.

Filmography

Television

Theatre

Film


