
#Article: Maggie Siff
#Type: regular article

Maggie Siff (born June 21, 1974) is an American actress. She is best known for her television roles as department store heiress Rachel Menken Katz on the AMC drama Mad Men and Dr. Tara Knowles-Teller on the FX drama Sons of Anarchy. She also had roles in the films Push (2009) as Teresa Stowe and Leaves of Grass (2010) as Rabbi Renannah Zimmerman.

Early life

Siff was born in The Bronx, New York City. Her father is Jewish, and Siff identifies as half-Jewish. She is an alumna of The Bronx High School of Science and of Bryn Mawr College, where she majored in English and graduated in 1996. She later completed an M.F.A. in acting at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts Graduate Acting Program.

Siff worked extensively in regional theater before acting in television. She won a Barrymore Award for Excellence in Theater in 1998 for her work in Henrik Ibsen's Ghosts at Lantern Theater Company.

Career

Siff started appearing in television series in 2004. She appeared as an Alcoholics Anonymous speaker during an episode of Rescue Me in Season 2. She also had roles on Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, Grey's Anatomy, and Law & Order.

She played Rachel Menken Katz on the series Mad Men from 2007 to 2008, which earned her a nomination, along with the rest of the cast, for a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series. She also appeared in Nip/Tuck during that time, before being cast as Dr. Tara Knowles on Sons of Anarchy in 2008. In the closing scene of the Sons of Anarchy episode "John 8:32," Siff sang the song "Lullaby for a Soldier (Arms of the Angels)."

She has appeared in such films as Then She Found Me (2007) as Lily, Push as a psychic surgeon (called a Stitch) named Teresa Stowe, sent to help Nick (played by Chris Evans), Funny People (2009) as Rachel, Leaves of Grass (2010) as Rabbi Renannah Zimmerman, and Concussion (2013) as Sam Bennet.

Personal life

In October 2013, Siff announced that she was expecting her first child with her husband, Paul Ratliff, whom she married in 2012. Siff is very private about her husband's identity. Siff gave birth to a baby girl in April 2014 named Lucy.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations


