
#Article: Ted Deutch
#Type: regular article

Theodore E. Deutch (born May 7, 1966), commonly known as Ted Deutch, is a Democratic member of the United States House of Representatives for Florida's 21st Congressional District. He first won election to Congress during a special election in April 2010 in Florida's 19th Congressional District. He previously served in the Florida Senate. In 2012, due to redistricting, he ran for and won re-election in Florida's 21st Congressional District.

Early life, Education, and Law Career

Deutch was born in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, the son of Jean (née Mindlin) and the late Bernard Deutch, who earned a Purple Heart during World War II. His grandparents were jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe. A graduate of Liberty High School in Bethlehem, Deutch graduated from the University of Michigan, where he served as Editor-in-Chief of Consider magazine, and the University of Michigan Law School.

Florida Senate

As a member of the National Young Leadership Cabinet of United Jewish Communities, Deutch organized over 2,500 people to march on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C. with the intent of pressuring Congress on a slate of issues affecting children and the elderly. At the end of his tenure in the state senate, Deutch served as Vice Chair of the Committee on Regulated Industries, and the Policy and Steering Subcommittee of the Ways and Means Committee.

U.S. House of Representatives

2010 Elections

	Special

In late 2009, Deutch declared himself a candidate in a special election to fill the 19th Congressional District seat formerly held by Robert Wexler, who left Congress to lead the Center for Middle East Peace and Economic Cooperation. He won the Democratic primary with 85% of the vote, and on April 13, 2010, won the special election, defeating Republican Edward J. Lynch.

Deutch's district is located on the East coast of Florida. It includes parts of Palm Beach and Broward counties.

	General

Deutch was challenged by Republican nominee Joe Budd and write-in candidate Stan Smilan. He won the election.

2012 Elections

	Redistricting

After Florida underwent redistricting in 2012, Deutch filed for re-election in Florida's 21st Congressional District. Deutch won the November 6, 2012 general election with no major party opposition.

Legislative Record

Shortly after his election, Deutch introduced the Preserving our Promise to Seniors Act, which aims to keep Social Security benefits in line with retirees' costs and gradually lifts the cap on FICA taxes over a period of seven years.

During the 2011 debate over the debt ceiling, Deutch assembled and brought to the house floor an elaborate, game-show style to illustrate which government services he claimed would be endangered by a default on the U.S. national debt.

	Constitutional Amendment

On November 19, 2011, Rep. Deutch introduced a resolution proposing "an amendment to the Constitution of the United States to expressly exclude for-profit corporations from the rights given to natural persons by the Constitution of the United States, prohibit corporate spending in all elections, and affirm the authority of Congress and the states to regulate corporations and to regulate and set limits on all election contributions and expenditures".

Rep. Deutch’s amendment is a blend of "ideas from "Move to Amend, Free Speech for People, Public Citizen, People For the American Way, Common Cause, and the Center for Media and Democracy".

Tenure

Deutch was sworn in as a member of the United States House of Representatives on April 15, 2010.

Committee assignments

	Committee on Foreign Affairs

	Subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere

	Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa

	Committee on the Judiciary

	Subcommittee on Courts, Intellectual Property, and the Internet

	Subcommittee on the Constitution and Civil Justice

	Committee on Ethics

Creator of Congressional Hellenic-Israel Alliance

In 2013, a bipartisan, congressional group of Greek-Israeli members was created by Deutch and Gus Bilirakis, a Republican representative from Florida. The group, called the "Congressional Hellenic-Israel Alliance," was announced at a special Congressional event. The Greek-Israeli caucus consisted of members of the Democratic and Republican parties.

Personal life

Deutch is a vegan.


