
#Article: Zoie Palmer
#Type: regular article

Zoie Palmer (born 28 October 1977) is an English-Canadian actress who became popular for playing the role of Dr. Lauren Lewis in the Canadian supernatural drama Lost Girl.

Early life

Born in Camborne, Cornwall, England, to parents of British and Irish descent, Zoie Palmer moved with her family to Canada when she was nine years old. She attended Sacred Heart Catholic High School in Newmarket, Ontario; and received a Bachelor of Fine Arts from York University in Toronto, Canada, in 2001. Palmer's first professional experience as an actor was as a teenager in summer stock at the Red Barn Theatre in Jackson's Point, Ontario, Canada.

Career

Palmer's television work includes made-for-TV movies The Reagans (2003) as Patti Reagan; Out of the Ashes (2003) as Didi Goldstein; Devil's Perch (2005) as Abby. Guest appearances include The CW American espionage drama Nikita in the episode "Girl's Best Friend" (2011) as Anya Vimer, a terrorist who tries to sabotage a peace summit; the HBO Canada comedy Call Me Fitz in the episode "Don of the Differently Abled" (2011) as Laura, an unhinged amputee with plans for an escort service for disabled people; the CTV Canadian fantasy drama The Listener in the third season finale episode "The Shooting" (2012) as Staff Sgt. McCoy, an investigator for Internal Affairs. She had a recurring role as rock singer Patsy Sewer in the CTV Canadian teen drama/comedy series Instant Star; and was a co-lead in the Global Canadian drama The Guard as Coast Guard rescue specialist Carly Greig (for which she had to conquer her fear of water). After Lost Girl ended, Palmer joined the main cast of science fiction series Dark Matter in the role of The Android. She appeared in the online dating web series comedy Seeking Simone in the episode "1.1: Single Lesbian Psychos" (2009) as Rebecca.

Film roles include Annabelle in the short drama Terminal Venus (2003); Haley in the romantic comedy The Untitled Work of Paul Shepard (2010); Cheryl in the supernatural horror Devil (2010); Officer Frances Jane in the crime thriller Cold Blooded (2012); Lou in the comedy Sex After Kids (2013); and Bethany in the fantasy adventure Patch Town (2014).

Zoie Palmer was awarded the "Gold Medallion Acting Award for Best Actress in a Feature Film" for Cold Blooded by the 2012 Bare Bones International Film Festival; and "Best Actor" for Terminal Venus by the 2004 Baja Film Festival (Mexico).

She received a 2014 Canadian Comedy Awards nomination for "Multimedia / Best Female Performance in a Feature" for Sex After Kids; and a 2011 ACTRA Awards nomination for "Outstanding Performance - Female" for The Untitled Work of Paul Shepard.

Palmer was the recipient of the "Fan Choice Award for Favourite Canadian Screen Star" by the 2014 Canadian Screen Awards. In its annual 50 Most Beautiful Stars issue celebrating homegrown talent, she was named "Number 1" for 2014 by HELLO! Canada magazine. In 2013 she won "Favorite TV Actress" and "Best Tweeter" in the annual AfterEllen Visibility Awards for popularity; and "Best Sci-Fi or Fantasy Actress" by Canadagraphs in its annual Best Of TV Awards. She was chosen "Girl on Top 2013" by E! Online (E! Entertainment Television) in its popularity contest of Favorite TV Leading Ladies.

In February 2013, her portrayal of Lauren together with Bo (Anna Silk) as same-sex couple "Bo and Lauren" on Lost Girl was named one of its all-time Favorite TV Couples by CNN (Cable News Network); and declared Top TV Couple of 2013 by E! Entertainment Television in its annual E! Online contest.

Personal life

Palmer's sister, Tracey (Palmer) Weiler, was a Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario candidate for the Kitchener—Waterloo electoral district in a 2012 by-election for the Legislative Assembly of Ontario, and the 2014 general election.

On March 9, 2014, Zoie Palmer came out publicly on stage during the 2014 Canadian Screen Awards when, after expressing gratitude for her Fan Choice Award, she thanked her partner, Canadian film producer Alex Lalonde. They have a son.

Filmography

Films

Television


