
#Article: Vivianne Pasmanter
#Type: regular article

Vivianne Pasmanter (May 24, 1971 in São Paulo) is a Brazilian actress.

Biography

Of Jewish origin, Vivianne is the daughter of Ricardo Pasmanter, civil engineer, and Berta Pasmanter, artist. Her first course was in Escola Hebraica de Teatro, where she met Caco Ciocler, who would later play opposite professionally. Within its formation are the Escola de Arte Dramática, courses with Antunes Filho and Miriam Mehler, among others.

She began her career doing commercials, like the jeans Staroup. One of her first jobs was as an actress in a cameo role as a fairy in one of the episodes of the painting "Senta que lá vem história...", the program Rá-Tim-Bum TV Cultura in 1990. But her first big career opportunity that occurred in 1991 when she moved to the city of Rio de Janeiro in order to play in her first novel, the villain Débora in the novel Felicidade, written by Manoel Carlos. Still with the same author would another villain weight, Laura of Por Amor.

In her career collecting roles in soap operas especially, as Malu of Mulheres de Areia, the Irene of A Próxima Vítima, the Lavínia of Anjo de Mim, the Elisabete of Andando nas Nuvens and Maria João of Uga-Uga. After six years of sporadic participation, returned to the screen in Páginas da Vida, as the photographer Isabel. Later played Regeane Cordeiro, one of the protagonists of the novel Tempos Modernos.

Her career is not only limited to television, theater and film is also, like the play Tartufo and movie Quase um Tango..., which won her the award Kikito for best actress in Festival de Gramado.

Personal life

She married in 2001 with entrepreneur Gilberto Zaborowsky, and the first attempt at being a mother suffered a miscarriage, second pregnancy was accompanied by a lot of tension, but satisfactory with the arrival of Eduardo, her eldest son. Lara, her second daughter, born in 2005, was not planned when she thought of returning to work in television, found herself pregnant. For five years she enjoyed family life, returned to work in theater and cinema, with the play Tartufo and the film Viva Voz. Gilberto was married to her for seven years, the separation was confirmed in 2008.

The actress also dated director Ignácio Coqueiro, who came to live with, and writer Vinícius Vianna.

Career

TV

Cinema

Theater


