
#Article: Kate Thornton
#Type: regular article

Kate Thornton is an English journalist and television presenter, best known as the first presenter of The X Factor (2004-2006) and for presenting daytime shows including Loose Women (2009-2011) and This Morning (2009-2012). In 2010, she co-presented the first series of 71 Degrees North alongside Gethin Jones. 

Early in her career, she wrote for the Daily Mirror, and was editor of Smash Hits magazine.

Career

Journalism

Thornton started her career at the Sunday Mirror in 1992 as an editorial assistant. She later became a pop music columist for the Daily Mirror. While in this role, Thornton was instrumental in initiating a media controversy concerning the British musical group Pulp. Prior to the release of the band's single Sorted for E's & Wizz in 1995, the Daily Mirror printed a front-page story headed "BAN THIS SICK STUNT" alongside a story by Kate Thornton which said the song was "pro-drugs" and called for the single to be banned. The pre-release single had an inlay which Thornton alleged showed how to make an origami 'wrap' or parcel with the intention of "offering teenage fans a DIY guide on hiding illegal drugs". In an interview with music paper NME on the same day, Thornton was quoted to say: "We wanted to see the sleeve pulled and we thought it was a crusade we would take up single-handedly. I think the sleeve is something that will concern our readers, although it may not concern yours." The band agreed to change the artwork, while continuing to assert that Thornton had misinterpreted the meaning of both the sleeve art and the song's lyrics. Lead singer Jarvis Cocker released a statement two days later saying: "...'Sorted' is not a pro-drugs song... Nowhere on the sleeve does it say you are supposed to put drugs in here but I understand the confusion... I wouldn't want anything we do to encourage people to take drugs because they aren't a solution or an answer to anything. I don't think anyone who listens to Sorted would come away thinking it had a pro drugs message. If they did I would say they had misinterpreted it."  The Daily Mirror printed his statement, but he was unhappy that the front page article written by Thornton contained the misquote "I don't want the sleeve to get in the way of what the record is saying, which is an anti-drugs message", which he felt over-simplified the song's meaning once again. He also criticised Thornton's decision to contact the father of a victim of an ecstasy-related death for a response. The Daily Mirror campaign continued, publishing their readers' response to a poll to have the song itself banned. The single reached number two on the UK Singles Charts, and the track featured on the band's 1995 album Different Class.

In 1995, she became the youngest ever editor of pop magazine Smash Hits at age 22, producing her first issue in February 1996 covering the breakup of boy-band Take That. She left a year later, having been unable to prevent a further slide in sales of the magazine. In 1997, she became a Features Editor at the Sunday Times, a post she held until 2001, and also a contributing Editor for magazine Marie Claire, in which position she continued until 2003.

Television

Whilst undertaking these new editorial roles, Thornton began a second career in television. In February 1997 Thornton was given her first TV presenting job, on the ITV current affairs programme Straight Up. She was tasked with putting together a photo tribute with music for Princess Diana on the day of her death. In an interview in March 2011, Thornton said: "...because it was a Sunday, the music library was shut and the only thing I had in my car, the only piece of music that was appropriate, was Candle in the Wind from Elton John's greatest hits." Colleagues attributed the subsequent airplay and then the re-recording of the song to this event. Thornton is quoted as having been doubtful initially, but later having come to accept the possibility: "I never dared to assume for one minute that I was the link. But Nick Knowles on the show has convinced me that whatever came as a result of it was all down to me."

Thornton has also presented Gravity Games for BBC Two, Women: The Naked Truth Honest for Channel 4 and Breasts Uncupped for Sky1.

Radio

Thornton has presented a number of programmes for BBC Radio 2 since 2002. As well as presenting, Thornton was also the writer of the radio documentary From Band to Brand in 2004, and the creator of the radio series Line of Enquiry, inviting an audience to put questions to a number of celebrities, which began in 2007.

From 10 March until 28 April 2013, Thornton presented The Boots Feel Good Forum, a radio show dedicated to health and fitness, which aired on Real Radio and Smooth Radio.

From 7-28 January 2014, Thornton hosted Paper Cuts, a four-part series on BBC Radio 2, walking Craig Revel Horwood, Patsy Kensit, Pete Waterman and Sheila Hancock through their lives via their newspaper headlines. Further episodes of Paper Cuts aired in June 2014, walking Jennifer Saunders through her life via her newspaper headlines. A third series of Paper Cuts aired in January 2015, walking Cilla Black, Paul O'Grady, Les Dennis and Roger Moore through their lives via their newspaper headlines.

Other work

Thornton hosted the live Strictly Come Dancing tour in 2008, 2009, 2010, 2012. She has been confirmed as the host of the 2013 tour.

Personal life

Thornton began dating DJ Darren Emerson in 2004. The couple became engaged in 2007. She gave birth to her first child, a boy named Ben on 13 May 2008. On 3 February 2011, she announced live on air that she and Darren had separated. In January 2012 Thornton told an interview with The Sun that after leaving Loose Women she had enrolled at college to study counselling because her television career had "hit the kerb".

Filmography

	Television

	Radio


