
#Article: Sarah Wynter
#Type: regular article

Sarah Wynter (born 15 February 1973) is an Australian actress, most widely known for her roles on American television - such as Kate Warner on the television drama 24 and as Beth on Windfall.

Early life

Wynter was born in Newcastle, Australia, the daughter of Helen Cummings, a worker in the Newcastle registry of the Family Court of Australia and lately author, and Stuart Wynter, a physician. Her grandmother, the late Joy Cummings, was the Lord Mayor of Newcastle - Australia's first female Lord Mayor. In 1984 her father killed his second wife and Sarah's half-sister before killing himself.

Personal life

On 20 August 2005, Wynter married Details magazine editor-in-chief Dan Peres in Sydney. Their first child, a son, was born on 14 January 2008 and Wynter gave birth to twin sons in April, 2011.

Career

Wynter's interest in acting led her to move to New York City when she was 17 to study drama.

Television

Wynter earned her SAG card by landing a role on the Sex and the City pilot, playing what she later summarized as the first woman to have sex on that show. A few years later, she was recognized by SAG again, as part of the second season cast of 24 when it earned a SAG Award nomination as Best Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series. Wynter played Kate Warner and appeared in all 24 episodes, plus the third season premiere and she provided her voice for 24: The Game. She had a recurring role in The Dead Zone and starred in the series Windfall in 2006. In 2009, Sarah appeared in "Unnatural Love", an episode of the second season of Flight of the Conchords as "Keitha", the Australian girlfriend of Jemaine. 

Wynter has signed on to Damages in a recurring role. She also guest starred in the episode "Identity Crisis" in the first season of Person of Interest, and is currently appearing in Californication.

Film

Wynter's first movie was Species 2 as the fiancée of the infected astronaut. Wynter appeared in The 6th Day alongside Arnold Schwarzenegger and Lost Souls with Winona Ryder as well as numerous independent movies such as Shooting Livien. Her Australian feature film debut Three Dollars, was released in 2005. She was also cast as Daisy Adair in Dead Like Me: Life After Death, the straight-to-DVD movie version of Showtime TV series Dead Like Me, replacing Laura Harris who had played her sister on 24.

Australian director Bruce Beresford cast Wynter as the lead in Bride of the Wind, his ambitious 2001 biopic of Alma Mahler, the wife of composer Gustav Mahler (and, after Mahler's death, of architect Walter Gropius and subsequently of writer Franz Werfel). The film was a notable flop both commercially and critically.


