
#Article: Kristen Cloke
#Type: regular article

Kristen Ann Cloke (born September 2, 1968) is an American actress. She is best known for her work in Space: Above and Beyond, and has acted in several small parts of other TV series as well as a role in Final Destination.

Personal life

Cloke was born in Van Nuys, California and attended California State University, Northridge. She is married to Glen Morgan and has four children.

Career

Her first feature film role was the female lead in Megaville (1990), alongside Billy Zane.

Kristen's other credits include lead parts in Caged Fear with David Keith and A Part of the Family. She has also had featured roles in Stay Tuned, Mistress, and The Marrying Man. Kristen's previous television credits include a regular role on Winnetka Road as Maybeth, a divorced mother of three and secretary to Ed Begley Jr.'s character. She also had a recurring role on the CBS/USA network show, Silk Stalkings, as Annie Overstreet, a former model and clothing designer. Kristen's guest appearances include The X-Files, One West Waikiki, Cheers, Mad About You, Dear John, Murder She Wrote, Quantum Leap and Doogie Howser, MD, and most recently, in December, 1998, as Tamara Harrington on ABC's Vengeance Unlimited (episode "Noir").

In 1995, Kristen's big break came when she portrayed the tough and gritty Captain Shane Autumn Vansen on Space: Above and Beyond.

As a result of her work as Vansen, Kristen won a guest spot on The X-Files (FOX) as the troubled Melissa Ephesian, a schizophrenic wife of cult leader Vernon Ephesian and soulmate of FBI Special Agent Fox Mulder. She would later describe the episode ("The Field Where I Died") as a love letter between herself and producer Glen Morgan (Space: Above and Beyond, The X-Files, Millennium), her then fiancé (now husband).

In 1996, she won a Daytime Emmy Award nomination for her performance in the ABC Afterschool Special The Long Road Home, in which she played a young wife who has difficulty relating to her husband's son. In 1997-98, she had recurring role as Dr. Lara Means of the Millennium Group on FOX's Millennium.

On March 17, 2000, Kristen returned to the big screen as Valerie Lewton in the Glen Morgan scripted and James Wong directed film, Final Destination.

In addition to her acting, she is the Artistic Director of The Alliance Repertory Company in Burbank, California, where she writes, produces and directs. 

Cloke was named #9 of Sci-Fi's Sexy 50, by Femme Fatales magazine in 1997.

Filmography


