
#Article: Tamsin Egerton
#Type: regular article

Tamsin Olivia Egerton (born 26 November 1988) is an English actress and model best known for her roles as Chelsea Parker in the 2007 film St Trinian's, Holly Goodfellow in the 2005 film Keeping Mum and Guinevere in the 2011 TV series Camelot.

Career

Egerton started her acting career age six, following her older sister, Sophia, to a local youth theatre, saying; "The whole reason I'm acting now is because I wanted to be doing what my big sister was doing". A year later, she appeared in a Royal Shakespeare Company musical production of The Secret Garden, playing Mary.

Egerton's other film credits include Sarah in Driving Lessons (2006) alongside Rupert Grint and Flora in Knife Edge (2008). She was to appear as Katrina in Eragon, but the scenes which she featured in were removed from the final cut.

Egerton starred as Princess Elenora in the TV children's series Sir Gadabout: The Worst Knight in the Land. In 2001, she starred as the "young" Morgaine in the TV miniseries The Mists of Avalon. She has also appeared on stage - in the RSC's musical version of The Secret Garden.

In 2009, Egerton appeared in the St Trinian's sequel, St Trinian's II: The Legend of Fritton's Gold.

In 2011, she appeared in Chalet Girl alongside Felicity Jones, Ed Westwick and Bill Nighy, playing Georgie.

In her second Arthurian role, Egerton plays Guinevere in the 2011 US Starz adaptation of the Arthurian legend, Camelot, also starring Joseph Fiennes, Eva Green and Jamie Campbell Bower.

Personal life

Egerton attended Ditcham Park School near Petersfield in Hampshire, where she says she was bullied. She also states she truanted, preferring to go to modelling shoots; "I played truant all the time. I was modelling so I'd go to shoots and call in sick." After finishing school at 16 with nine A-grade GCSEs, Egerton decided to pursue acting rather than going to sixth form and then university, saying, "At drama school, they like to take you apart and rebuild you but I don't want to change now." She had a brief job as a babysitter for three children. She previously shared a flat in Marylebone, Central London, with her St Trinians castmate Talulah Riley, whom she described as her "soulmate". She lived in Hampstead with theatre producer Jamie Hendry.

She has cited Takeshi Kitano as her favourite film director, and said, "I’d love Takeshi Kitano to put me in a martial arts film so I’d have an excuse to practise all the time".

Tamsin has been dating American actor Josh Hartnett since 2012. On 2 July 2015 it was announced that they are expecting their first child together.

Filmography

Film

Television


