
#Article: Lisa Cholodenko
#Type: regular article

Lisa Cholodenko (born June 5, 1964) is an American screenwriter and director of film and television. She is best known for making the films High Art, Laurel Canyon and The Kids Are All Right.

Early life

Cholodenko was born in the San Fernando Valley of California, the daughter of Marcia Cholodenko (née Elins) and Paul Cholodenko. She is the middle daughter of three sisters: her older sister is Karen Kardan, her younger sister is Laura Cholodenko.

Cholodenko is from a liberal Jewish family. Her paternal grandparents emigrated from Ukraine. Cholodenko's paternal great grandfather was from Kiev, Ukraine.

Cholodenko studied anthropology, ethnic studies, and women's studies at San Francisco State University She travelled to India and Nepal and spent 18 months in Jerusalem after graduation.

She then enrolled at Columbia University School of the Arts in 1992, earning an MFA in screenwriting and directing in 1997, where James Schamus was one of her professors, who would later become the CEO of Focus Features.

Career

She got her start in the film industry in New York in the early 1990s. She worked as an apprentice editor on John Singleton's Boyz n the Hood and as an assistant editor on Beeban Kidron's Used People.

Film

While at Columbia, Cholodenko wrote and directed a number of short films, including Souvenir (1994), which screened at numerous international film festivals and Dinner Party (1997), which aired on UK, French, and Swiss television, and was a winner of the British Film Institute’s Channel 4 TX prize.

Miloš Forman provided mentorship and encouragement as Cholodenko made her feature film debut with High Art. High Art won the Waldo Salt Screenwriting Award at the Sundance Film Festival as well as the National Society of Film Critics award for Ally Sheedy's performance. Both High Art and her next film, Laurel Canyon, premiered at Cannes Director's Fortnight. The Joni Mitchell record Ladies of the Canyon was the catalyst for Laurel Canyon, which was set and filmed in the heart of the Hollywood Hills.

In 2010, she was awarded the Women in Film Dorothy Arzner Directors Award.

After completing Laurel Canyon, Cholodenko decided to move to LA permanently. While in the process of trying to conceive a child via anonymous sperm donor, she met with screenwriter Stuart Blumberg, who was a sperm donor in college. Together, they decided to write a screenplay, which would eventually become The Kids Are All Right. However, the project took five years to get to production. Filmed in 23 days, Cholodenko directed the film on a $3.5 million budget, a much smaller amount than her fellow 2011 Oscar nominees. The film was made with three different sources of equity financing, with Focus Features picking up the film for distribution.

The Kids Are All Right received a nomination for an Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay, a BAFTA Award for Best Original Screenplay nomination, and a Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay nomination. The film won the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture - Musical or Comedy. The film was also named best screenplay by the New York Film Critics Circle and won the Independent Spirit Award for best screenplay.

Cholodenko was a 2012-2013 member of the Board of Governors of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.

In June 2014, Cholodenko was the guest director of the 20th annual Los Angeles Film Festival.

Television

Cholodenko has also worked in television, with her adaptation of the novel Cavedweller for Showtime earning Independent Spirit Award nominations for Kyra Sedgwick and Aidan Quinn. She also directed episodes of Homicide: Life on the Street, Six Feet Under, The L Word, and Hung.

In 2014, Cholodenko directed an HBO mini-series Olive Kitteridge starring Frances McDormand and Richard Jenkins. Olive Kitteridge is based on the Pulitzer Prize-winning novel of the same name by Elizabeth Strout. Bill Murray, Jesse Plemons, Zoe Kazan, and John Gallagher, Jr. co-starred.

The four-part mini-series Olive Kitteridge premiered at the 2014 Venice Film Festival to overwhelmingly positive reviews. The show received widespread critical acclaim when it premiered on television in November and it received three Golden Globe nominations. Later, Cholodenko received a Directors Guild Award and a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for her work on the miniseries.

Cholodenko has signed to direct the first episode and executive produce NBC's eight episode miniseries called The Slap, which is based on an Australian show of the same name, The Slap.

Themes

Cholodenko has written all of three of her films, and there are some thematic similarities as a result. Each of them are psychological character studies, revolving around a small cast of characters, and as the films progress the audience observes how the characters interact amongst each other. Her films address the fluidity of human sexuality and desire, and Cholodenko's work has helped give the LGBTQ community visibility in mainstream culture.

Controversy

Though The Kids Are All Right was generally applauded by critics and audiences alike, garnering a Metacritic score of 86 and a Rotten Tomatoes Top Critics score of 95%, the film received differing opinions from the LGBTQ community, particularly for the plot device of a homosexual woman truly enjoying heterosexuality. Some critics saw this as a trope used in mainstream Hollywood, citing films like Kissing Jessica Stein and Chasing Amy. However, other critics defended Cholodenko's artistic choice, and found her approach realistic and well-handled.

Personal life

Cholodenko is in a relationship with musician Wendy Melvoin. Cholodenko gave birth to their son, Calder, by way of an anonymous sperm donor.

Cholodenko lives in the Beachwood Canyon area of Los Angeles.

Filmography

Feature films

	High Art (1998)

	Laurel Canyon (2002)

	Cavedweller (2004)

	The Kids Are All Right (2010)

Television

	Homicide: Life on the Street (episode: "The Same Coin") (1999)

	Six Feet Under (episode: "Familia") (2001)

	Push, Nevada (episode: "The Letter of the Law") (2002)

	The L Word (episode: "Lynch Pin") (2005)

	Hung (episode: "Beaverland") (2010)

	Olive Kitteridge (four part miniseries) (2014)

	The Slap (episode: "Hector") (2015)

Shorts

	Souvenir (1994)

	Dinner Party (1997)

Production work

	Boyz n the Hood (1991) (apprentice editor)

	Lawnmower Man (1992) (assistant editor)

	Used People (1992) (second assistant editor: Los Angeles)

	The Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love (1995) (third grip)

	Some of These Days (1996) (first assistant director)


