
#Article: Pablo Schreiber
#Type: regular article

Pablo Tell Schreiber (born April 26, 1978) is a Canadian-born American actor known for his dramatic stage work and for his portrayal of Nick Sobotka on The Wire and for his Emmy nominated role of George Mendez on Orange Is the New Black. He was nominated for a Tony Award for his performance in Awake and Sing! on Broadway. He also narrated the American Psycho audiobook. He also starred in the HBO series The Brink as Lieutenant Commander Zeke "Z-Pak" Tilson, a Naval pilot who is also a drug dealer.

Early life

Schreiber was born on a hippie commune in Ymir, British Columbia, before moving to Winlaw, British Columbia, when he was six months old. His American father, Tell Schreiber, was an actor, as is his half-brother Liev Schreiber. His mother, Lorraine Reaveley, is a Canadian body-based psychotherapist. He was named after Chilean poet Pablo Neruda (his father had a strong interest in Literature). His parents split when he was 12 and Schreiber moved to Seattle, Washington, with his father. After high school, Schreiber enrolled at the University of San Francisco, where he hoped to win a spot on its basketball team. He later transferred to Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and graduated in 2000 with a degree in Theatre.

Career

He appeared in the films The Manchurian Candidate, Lords of Dogtown and Happythankyoumoreplease. He also had a recurring guest role on Law & Order: Special Victims Unit as a sadistic rapist, and appeared in the FX series Lights Out.

In 2011, Schreiber starred in the Off-Broadway play Gruesome Playground Injuries at Second Stage Theatre. He appeared on the seventh season of Weeds as Demetri Ravitch, Nancy Botwin's drug supplier.

BuddyTV ranked him number seventy-seven on its list of "TV's Sexiest Men of 2011".

In October 2012, Schreiber landed the recurring role of George "Pornstache" Mendez on the Netflix original drama series Orange Is the New Black. On February 26, 2013, he co-starred as Virgil in NBC's drama pilot Ironside, a reboot of the 1967 series of the same name. 

For his role in Orange Is the New Black, Schreiber won the We Love to Hate You Award at the 2014 Young Hollywood Awards.

Filmography

Audiobooks


