
#Article: Albert Kan-Dapaah
#Type: regular article

Albert Kan-Dapaah (born 14 March 1953) is a chartered accountant, politician, member of parliament and a former minister of state in Ghana.

Early life and education

Kan-Dapaah was born on 14 March 1953. He is an Ashanti and hails from Maase-Boaman in the Ashanti Region of Ghana. Albert Kan-Dapaah had his secondary education at Acherensua Secondary School from 1964 to 1969. He then studied Accountancy at the Institute of Professional Studies (IPS), Legon. He had further Accountancy courses at the North East London Polytechnic, London and the Emile Woolf College of Accountancy.

Career

Kan-Dapaah worked with Pannel Kerr Forster, a chartered accounting firm as an Audit Senior. He worked in their offices in Monrovia, Liberia and London, UK between 1978 and 1986. Back in Ghana, he was the head of Audit at the Social Security and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) from January 1987. In September 1987, he joined the Electricity Corporation of Ghana where he rose from Director of Audit to become Director for Finance, a position he held for six years.

Kan-Dapaah was a partner in Kwesie, Kan-Dapaah and Baah Co., a firm of Chartered Accountants in Accra. He was also managing Consultant of Kan-Dapaah and Associates, a utility consultancy support group. He has also lectured Auditing part-time at the School of Business Administration, University of Ghana and the IPS.

Politics

Albert Kan-Dapaah was the Ashanti Regional Representative on the National Council of the New Patriotic Party (NPP) between 1992 and 1996. He was also a member of the Finance and Economic Affairs Committee of the NPP. He won the Afigya-Sekyere seat at the 1996 parliamentary election. He took his seat in January 1997 in opposition and has held his seat in the two subsequent parliamentary elections in 2000 and 2004. He became Minister for Energy in the Kufuor government after the NPP won power in the 2000 elections. During the April 2003 cabinet reshuffle, he became the Minister for Communications and Technology. He became the Minister for Interior during Kufuor's second term.

Other Positions held

	 1996 - President of the Institute of Chartered Accountants, Ghana

	 1996 - Vice-President, Association of Accountancy Bodies in West Africa


