
#Article: Natalie Gal
#Type: regular article

Natalya Ivanovna Galkina, simply known as Natalie Gal (Наталья Ивановна Галкина; born December 18, 1985) is a Russian model and actress, who made her television debut as runner-up on the eighth series of America's Next Top Model. She is currently the new face of Dermalogica Skin Care, Neutrogena Hydro Boost collection, and The Body Shop Natural Products inspired by Nature. She used to be the cover of Shiseido on Various magazines for Dec issue 2009, Guess Couture Collection spread in 2010, and Clinique Pop Lip Colour Primer. She has been pursuing her modelling careers succeedingly. 

Early life

Natalie was born in 1985 in Bataysk, Rostov Oblast in Soviet Union at the time of her birth. She was born into the family of an opera singer and a poet; she began studying ballet, gymnastics and art, playing piano, singing, and performing in a theatre at the age of 6. She studied acting at the Moscow Art Theatre and New York University.

America's Next Top Model

In 2007, Gal was a contestant on America's Next Top Model, Cycle 8, where she was known as Natasha. She had a weak start, but by the fourth week she was receiving recognition and from the fifth till the final show she maintained a place in the top three photos. For five consecutive weeks (fifth until tenth) she finished in the top two photos, and received two first-call outs. Natasha made it through to the final against Jaslene Gonzalez, who was announced as the winner, with Natasha finishing as the runner-up.

After America's Next Top Model

Natasha is currently signed with Red Model Management in New York City, under the name "Alie M", NEXT Model Management in Milan and Elite Model Management in New York. She used to be signed with MUSE Modeling Agency in New York, IMG Models in New York, MGMT First in New York City, Ace Model Management in Athens, Beatrice International Models in Milan, Wilhelmina Models in L.A and Ford Models in New York. She also been walked for D&G, Valentino, Chanel, Cavalli, Anna Sui, Dior, Gucci, Prada, Louis Vuitton, Versace, Fendi, Burberry and Dolce and Gabbana. She has also walked for Mercedez-Benz Fashion Week 2010. She also appears a lots of editorials for Italian Vogue as well as A Cover Of Beauty In Vogue In Russia, Teen Vogue, I-D Magazine, Elle Magazine, Seventeen Magazine, Harper's Bazaar in Hong Kong, Fashion Magazine, Vanity Fair, Marie Claire and Maxim Magazine. She is known as one of the most beautiful contestants of America's Next Top Model ever. Galkina also appeared in an ads campaign for Roberto Cavalli "Spring 2010" along with Kate Moss And Lily Cole. She also signed with Fenton Moon NY along with Andrea Debevc and Mikaela Schipani.

Personal life

Gal was married to Stuart Hagler, an American who was 22 years her senior and who brought her over to the US with him. They divorced in 2009 and have a daughter named Angelina, who was born in 2005. In March 2014, Gal was seen at a West Hollywood cafe having an affectionate, dinner date with actor Jim Carrey.

Gal studies acting at Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute in West Hollywood, CA and lives between her homes in L.A. and New York City. She also speaks Russian, Ukrainian, Spanish and English fluently.


