
#Article: Georgia Moffett
#Type: regular article

Georgia Elizabeth Tennant (née Moffett; born 25 December 1984) is an English actress. She played Detective Inspector Samantha Nixon's daughter Abigail in The Bill, She played The Doctor's daughter Jenny in the Doctor Who episode "The Doctor's Daughter" and Lady Vivian in the show Merlin.

Early life

Moffett was born in London, the daughter of actors Peter Moffett (better known by his stage name, Peter Davison) and Sandra Dickinson. She attended St Edward's School in Oxford. Her maternal grandfather Harold Searles is one of the pioneers of psychiatric medicine specialising in psychoanalytic treatments of schizophrenia.

Career

Moffett made her television debut at the age of 15 in Peak Practice (1999), playing Nicki Davey. Moffett has appeared in television dramas such as The Second Quest and Like Father Like Son. She played downtrodden Alice Harding in the ITV drama Where the Heart Is in 2004 and 2005 and has performed alongside her father in Fear, Stress & Anger  and The Last Detective.

In 2007, she made her theatrical debut as Mathilde Verlaine in Total Eclipse at London's Menier Chocolate Factory. In May 2008, Moffett starred in the BBC series Doctor Who as the Tenth Doctor's artificially-created daughter, Jenny, in the episode "The Doctor's Daughter", with her future husband David Tennant playing the Doctor (Moffett is the daughter of Peter Davison, who played the Fifth Doctor in the 1980s). In August 2008, Moffett starred in series one of BBC Three's spy spin-off Spooks: Code 9 as Kylie Roman.

She voiced the role of Cassie Rice in Doctor Who: Dreamland in 2010, and portrayed Lady Vivian in the "Sweet Dreams" episode of the BBC drama Merlin. She joined the cast of BBC medical drama Casualty as junior doctor Heather Whitefield, but her character was killed off at the start of her second episode.

In June 2010, she performed in the short play Hens, which ran for four performances at the Riverside Studios and was later broadcast on Sky Arts 2, and played a cameo role in the TV drama Thorne: Sleepyhead as the wife of one of the junior detectives (appearing in one scene in episode two, and one non-speaking scene in episode three). In March 2011, she landed the role of Emma in the BBC Three sitcom White Van Man, which ran for two series before being cancelled. In May 2012, Moffett made her West End debut in the play What the Butler Saw at the Vaudeville Theatre in London. The play received poor reviews and ticket sales and on 13 July the production announced via their official website that the play had been cancelled and would be ending the following week, a month earlier than scheduled.

In November 2013, she appeared in and produced the Doctor Who homage webcast The Five(ish) Doctors Reboot; as producer she was credited under her married name of Georgia Tennant (though her acting appearance is credited under Georgia Moffett). It was written and directed by her father, and featured cameo appearances by her husband and her two older children (she was at the time of filming heavily pregnant with her third, and the webcast features a scripted scene of her going into labour).

Moffett produced (again under her married name, Georgia Tennant) and starred in a short film called 96 Ways To Say I Love You, which also co-starred her husband David Tennant. The film premiered at the London Independent Film Festival in April 2015.

Personal life

Moffett had her first child, a son, Ty Peter Tennant (born Ty Peter Moffett-Martin), on 27 March 2002. Moffett and her son have appeared together on the British reality series Four Weddings, and on an episode of Doctor Who Confidential. He interviewed her for a video for the BBC website. Ty attends a drama school in Shepperton owned by his grandmother, Sandra Dickinson, and made his acting debut in May 2010 in a TV commercial for The Great British Teddy Bear Company, he also played a role in The Five-ish Doctors.

In January 2011, several newspapers in the United Kingdom reported that Moffett was engaged to actor David Tennant. Moffett gave birth to the couple's daughter, Olive, two months later, on 29 March 2011. Moffett and Tennant married on 30 December 2011. In 2011, Tennant adopted Moffett's son, Ty. Olive made her screen debut at two, playing John Barrowman's daughter in The Five-ish Doctors. On 5 January 2013, Jonathan Ross announced, during a TV interview with Tennant, that Moffett was pregnant for the third time. On 2 May 2013, Georgia gave birth to the couple's son, Wilfred. On 9 November 2015, Tennant announced that he and Moffett had recently had another baby daughter.

The couple avoid talking about each other or their relationship in the press, and ask interviewers not to mention the subject. No posed or red carpet photographs of the pair exist as they have never posed together or walked a red carpet together. However, paparazzi photos of the pair exist.

Moffett is a patron of Straight Talking, a charity set up to educate young people about teen pregnancy.

Filmography

Television

Film

Stage

Radio


