
#Article: Lília Cabral
#Type: regular article

Lília Cabral Bertolli Figueiredo (born July 13, 1957 in São Paulo) is a Brazilian actress.

Biography

Lília is a Brazilian actress, the daughter of an Italian father, Gino Bertolli, and a Portuguese mother, Almedina Cabral, who was born in São Miguel, Azores. Lilia lost her mother when she was very young, before she started working in television, which she deeply resents, as her mother never had the opportunity to see her work as an actress. She is from the São Paulo neighborhood of Lapa, where she spent her childhood, but has lived in Rio de Janeiro for over twenty years.

Her first marriage was to filmmaker João Henrique Jardim when she was very young, but the marriage did not last long. Since 1994 she has been married to the economist Iwan Figueiredo, who is the father of her only daughter, Giulia, who was born when Lilia was 38. The pregnancy was not planned. She suffered three miscarriages before her pregnancy.

Career

Lilia began her career in the theater performing in the play Feliz Ano Velho, based on a book by Marcelo Rubens Paiva.

She debuted on television in 1981 in the telenovela, Os Adolescentes, written by Ivani Ribeiro and produced by Rede Bandeirantes.

In 1984, she moved to Rede Globo to act in Corpo a Corpo, by Gilberto Braga, and there she remains today.

In 2003, Lilia participated in Chocolate com Pimenta as the comic villain Bárbara. Later, she joined the cast of Começar de Novo as Aída, the owner of a famous spa.

In 2006, she starred as the main antagonist of Páginas da Vida as the insensitive Marta. For her brilliant performance she received the Trophy Press award for Best Actress. She was also nominated for an International Emmy Award for Best Actress in 2007., but she lost the award to the French actress Muriel Robin for her part in Marie Besnard - The Poisoner.

Lilia starred as the protagonist Griselda Pereira in the telenovela Fina Estampa in 2011. In 2012, she won two Best Actress awards for her excellent portrayal of Griselda.

Filmography

Television

Film

Awards and nominations


