
#Article: Terry Crews
#Type: regular article

Terry Alan Crews (born July 30, 1968) is an American actor and former American football player. He is perhaps best known for playing Julius on the UPN/CW sitcom Everybody Hates Chris and for his appearances in Old Spice commercials, as well as films such as Friday After Next, Idiocracy, and The Expendables series.

Crews starred as Nick Kingston-Persons in the TBS sitcom Are We There Yet? and as himself in the BET reality series The Family Crews. , he plays NYPD Sergeant Terry Jeffords on the Fox sitcom Brooklyn NineNine and also hosted the game show Who Wants to Be a Millionaire from 2014 until 2015.

Early life

Crews was born in Flint, Michigan, the son of Patricia and Terry Crews Sr. He grew up in a strict Christian household, where he was raised mainly by his mother. After earning his high school diploma from Flint Academy High School, now known as Flint Southwestern Academy, he received a Chrysler-sponsored art scholarship at the prestigious Interlochen Center for the Arts in Michigan. This achievement was soon followed by an Art Excellence scholarship and a full-ride athletic scholarship for football at Western Michigan University. As a defensive end for the WMU Broncos, Crews earned All-Conference honors and helped his team win the Mid-American Conference Championship in 1988.

In an appearance on Jimmy Kimmel Live, Crews stated that his first job in the entertainment industry was working as an artist for WJRT in Flint, Michigan. Crews later became the courtroom sketch artist for the station.

NFL career

Crews was drafted by the Los Angeles Rams in the 11th round of the 1991 NFL Draft. His career included stints with the Rams, the San Diego Chargers, the Washington Redskins, and the Philadelphia Eagles.

Crews revealed in an interview with Adam Carolla that he painted portraits of his teammates in order to supplement his income.

Acting career

After retiring from the NFL in 1997, Crews pursued an acting career and got a role as TMoney on Battle Dome. He later had roles in films such as White Chicks, Friday After Next, Training Day, Soul Plane, The Longest Yard, The Benchwarmers, and Street Kings He has made many cameo appearances; he was in Blink182's music video for "Down" as a police officer and in Jamie Kennedy's "Rollin' with Saget" as a security guard. Crews appears in Click as the singing driver Adam Sandler's character Michael Newman encounters while stuck in traffic, and Crews also portrays a singing host at a resort in Blended with Adam Sandler.

His stint as the father on Everybody Hates Chris gained him further fame.

He has been featured in several Old Spice TV commercials for their "Odor Blocker Body Wash", their body sprays, deodorant, shaving lotion, and most recently ads for "Bearglove" scented products that feature him dueling against Isaiah Mustafa, who does The Man Your Man Could Smell Like commercials. The ads are directed by Tim Heidecker and Eric Wareheim. He has also done commercials for Nike. He starred in his own reality series on BET, The Family Crews, about his everyday life with his family. The show premiered on February21, 2010. Since 2013, he has starred on the two-time Golden Globe award winning television show Brooklyn NineNine. He has been nominated for a 2015 Screen Actors Guild award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series, and a 2015 Image Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series for his work on the show.

Personal life

Crews married Rebecca King, a former beauty queen and gospel recording artist, in 1990. They have three daughters, Azriel ( 1990), Tera ( 1999), and Wynfrey ( 2004), and one son, Isaiah ( 2007). He has one step-grandchild through a stepdaughter from his wife's previous relationship, Naomi ( 1989). He is a Christian.

Crews is also a hobby painter and sketch artist.

In 2014 he released his autobiography, Manhood: How To Be A Better Man Or Just Live With One.

Filmography

Film

Television

Music videos

Video games


