
#Article: Kathryn Hahn
#Type: regular article

Kathryn Hahn (born July 23, 1973) is an American actress. She played Lily Lebowski on the television series Crossing Jordan.

Early life

Hahn was born in Westchester, Illinois, and has German, Irish, and English ancestry. She was raised in Cleveland Heights, Ohio and attended Beaumont School. She attended Northwestern University, where she obtained a bachelor's degree in theatre before attending Yale University. While attending Yale School of Drama, Hahn starred as Sally Bowles in Cabaret and as Célimène in Molière's play The Misanthrope.

Career

Hahn's first appearance on a show was NBC's Hickory Hideout, a puppet show for children. While attending a theater festival she met an NBC casting director who introduced her to creator/producer Tim Kring, who created the role of Lily Lebowski in Crossing Jordan for her. Hahn has said of meeting Kring, "NBC and Tim Kring took a huge leap of faith in casting me. To be worked into a show that was in production and on the schedule, is an amazing stroke of luck". On October 21, 2008, TV Guide reported that Hahn signed a talent holding deal with Fox.

Hahn's screen credits include How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days, Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy, A Lot Like Love, Win a Date with Tad Hamilton!, The Last Mimzy, The Holiday, Revolutionary Road, Step Brothers, and The Goods: Live Hard, Sell Hard.

In 2009, she was cast in the pilot for the American version of the hit British TV show, Absolutely Fabulous. In 2010, she had a recurring role as Claire in Season 2 of HBO TV series Hung.

In 2011, she starred on NBC with Hank Azaria in Free Agents, a remake of the British series of the same name.

In 2012, she started a recurring role on Parks and Recreation as Jennifer Barkley, campaign manager to Leslie Knope's (Amy Poehler) opponent Bobby Newport (Paul Rudd, whom she starred alongside in Our Idiot Brother, How Do You Know, and Wanderlust). She also played a recurring role on the HBO series Girls, Edie Fitzgerald in the 2013 comedy film We're the Millers, and Rachel in Afternoon Delight in 2013 directed by Jill Soloway.

In 2014, she provided the voice of Tracy in the FX animated comedy Chozen.

In 2015, she starred in Peter Bogdanovich's She's Funny That Way.

Personal life

Hahn has been married to actor Ethan Sandler since January 3, 2002. The couple resides in Los Angeles. They have two children: a boy, Leonard (b. October 8, 2006) and a girl, Mae (b. July 27, 2009); Mae was born prematurely. Her pregnancy with Leonard was written into the storyline of Crossing Jordan, with Sandler portraying the baby's father.

Filmography

Film

Television

Theatre


