
#Article: Anna Gunn
#Type: regular article

Anna Gunn (born August 11, 1968) is an American actress, best known for her role as Skyler White on the AMC drama series Breaking Bad, for which she won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series in 2013 and 2014.

Early life

Anna Gunn was born in Santa Fe, New Mexico, to Shana, an interior designer, and Clem, who worked in real estate. She graduated from Santa Fe Preparatory School in 1986. She attended Northwestern University, where she majored in theater and graduated in 1990. During fall of 1988, Gunn spent a semester abroad to study at the British American Drama Academy.

Career

Gunn is known for her role as Skyler White in the AMC drama series Breaking Bad, starring Bryan Cranston. In 2012, 2013 and 2014, she was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series for her performance in that show, and subsequently won in 2013 and 2014. In August 2013, she wrote an op-ed piece for The New York Times examining the public dislike directed toward her character.

Gunn played a recurring role as Assistant District Attorney Jean Ward on the ABC series The Practice from 1997 to 2002, and was a regular as Martha Bullock on HBO's Deadwood from 2005 to 2006. She appeared on Seinfeld in the episode "The Glasses", in the Six Feet Under episode "Parallel Play", and on the first season of Murder One.

Gunn provided the voice for Ariel in the Legacy of Kain series of video games. She also appeared in the Quantum Leap episode "The Play's The Thing". In 2011, she played a lead role in the Lifetime movie Secrets of Eden, opposite John Stamos. Her other film credits include Without Evidence, Enemy of the State, Treading Water, Twelve Mile Road, and Red State.

In February 2013, the cable network Bravo announced Gunn would star in a television pilot for a one-hour drama, Rita, based on a Danish TV series about a private-school teacher and mother. The Fox TV Studios pilot was to be written by Krista Vernoff and directed by Miguel Arteta.

In 2014, Gunn starred Off-Broadway with Billy Magnussen in Sex With Strangers, directed by David Schwimmer at Second Stage Theatre.

Personal life

Gunn and her ex-husband, actor and real estate broker Alastair Duncan, have two daughters, Eila Rose and Emma.

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games

Awards and nominations


