
#Article: Adriana Esteves
#Type: regular article

Adriana Esteves Agostinho Brichta (born December 15, 1969 in Rio de Janeiro) is a Brazilian actress.

She was nominated for an International Emmy Award in 2011, for best actress in a dramatic series for her portrayal of Dalva de Oliveira in the miniseries, Dalva e Herivelto: uma Canção de Amor.

Biography

Daughter of Regina Esteves Agostinho and Paulo Felipe Agostinho, Adriana began her career as a model and got her first job on television as part of the series, "Star for a Day", on the show Domingão do Faustão.

Her first television appearance was as an extra on the soap opera Vale Tudo. She was also a successful model. Herdebut novel was released in 1989 with Top Model (1989).

In 2005, she took on the part of Celinha on the series, Toma Lá, Dá Cá. When the program aired on the Globo in 2007, Adriana, after maternity leave with her second child, reprised her role as Celinha.

While still recording Toma Lá, Dá Cá, Adriana recorded the miniseries, Dalva e Herivelto - Uma Canção de Amor, playing singer Dalva de Oliveira. The miniseries aired in January 2010. In the same year, she starred an the episode of the "A Vingativa do Méier" series As Cariocas.

In 2011, she was cast as Julia, the protagonist of Morde & Assopra, who was part of a love triangle with scientist Ícaro (Mateus Solano) and farmer Abner (Marcos Pasquim). In 2012, she gained notoriety for interpreting the villain Carminha on the soap opera, Avenida Brasil, written by João Emanuel Carneiro. She received praise from critics and audiences alike for her performance and was enshrined as one of the greatest villains of Brazilian television—only surpassed by Odete Roitman of Vale Tudo, Nazaré Tedesco of Senhora do Destino and Flora of A Favorita.

Personal life

Adriana's first boyfriend, who later became her husband, was jiujitsu teacher Totila Jordan. They married in 1988 and remained together for two years, divorcing in 1990.

In 1994, she married actor Marco Ricca. A year later, she discovered he suffered from anxiety and panic disorder. In 2000, they had a son together, Felipe. In 2004, Adriana and Marco parted ways.

After months of separation from Marco, she started dating actor Vladimir Brichta. In February 2006, they married. In the same year, after a few months of marriage, their first son, Vicente, was born.  Adriana became the stepmother of Agnes, born in 1997, who was Vladimir Brichta's daughter from his first wife, singer Gena, who died in 1999 of blood cancer.

Filmography

Television

Film

Theater


