
#Article: Annie Mumolo
#Type: regular article

Anne Marie "Annie" Mumolo (born July 10, 1973) is an American actress, screenwriter, comedian and producer, known for 2011 film Bridesmaids, for which she was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay and BAFTA Award for Best Original Screenplay.

Early life

Mumolo was born in Irvine, California, to a dentist father and a homemaker mother. She is of Italian descent. Her grandfather, Dominic Mumolo, was a studio musician on staff at NBC from 1949 to 1971, where he played on The Dean Martin Show, Rowan & Martin's Laugh-In, The Andy Williams Show and The Tonight Show. He also recorded with musicians including Frank Sinatra, Nat King Cole, and Nelson Riddle.

Mumolo graduated from Mater Dei High School in 1991 and the University of California, Berkeley, where she was a member of Chi Omega and received her B.A. in history in 1995.

Career

Acting

She is a member of the improvisational comedy troupe The Groundlings. She appeared in the 2005 feature film Bewitched, and television shows such as The Minor Accomplishments of Jackie Woodman, Out of Practice, and Two and a Half Men. She started voice acting in 2004 on the television series Maya & Miguel. She was recently a voice actress on Random! Cartoons, for the segments Hero Heights, Sparkles and Gloom, and Thom Cat. She appeared in two ABC pilots this year; Bad Mother's Handbook and This Might Hurt. She voices Jimmy and Natalie in the cartoon shorts Ape Escape on Nicktoons Network. In 2011, she played an anxious airline passenger in her own film, Bridesmaids. Mumolo also starred as Laurie in the NBC comedy series About a Boy.

Screenwriting

Mumolo wrote an episode of In the Motherhood titled "Where There's a Will, There's a Wake". She co-wrote the script for the 2011 comedy film Bridesmaids with Saturday Night Live cast member Kristen Wiig for Universal Studios. Judd Apatow produced the project, with Paul Feig directing.

Mandate Pictures is currently developing an untitled comedy feature film written by Mumolo and produced by Dana Fox and Lorene Scafaria. The story will be about "three girls who travel to New York to celebrate New Year's Eve only to be beset by a snowstorm en route, but are still intent on making it to the city before the celebratory ball drops". Mumolo said, "I wanted to write a story based on the things my friends and I are experiencing in our thirties that completely took us by surprise. ... It was important to me that the story really capture the issues and struggles we are going through in a funny and authentic way. ... We were stuck home on New Year's Eve, and everybody else got to go to parties, and we made a video that night. ... We were laughing so hard it, and my friend said she was a 100% positive that she's never had as much fun as she did when she was 16. And I just thought about that a lot, how we go from 'I'm going to change the world' to 'I'm just trying to figure out where I fit in'." Nathan Kahane will executive produce the film, "seeing it as a complement to the other female-voiced comedies the company has done".

Personal life

Mumolo is married to Tim Lovestedt and they have two children.

Filmography


