
#Article: Gabriel Soto
#Type: regular article

Gabriel Soto Borja-Diaz (born April 17, 1975 in Mexico City, Distrito Federal) is a Mexican actor, model. He is known for winning the national male pageant El Modelo Mexico, placing first runner-up in Mister World 1996, being a member of the former Mexican boy band Kairo, and for acting in telenovelas.

Biography

Gabriel Soto attended Edron Academy.

He has 2 daughters, Elisa Marie, born on February 17, 2009 and Alexa Miranda born on Feb. 19, 2014 with partner, actress Géraldine Bazán.

Career

He began modeling at age 18 after participating in the Mr. World contest in 1996 in the city of Istanbul in Turkey, becoming the first runner-up among participants from around the world. In 1997, Gabriel joins the band Kairo replacing Eduardo Verástegui. On discs has participated are: Libres and Pasiones.

He has participated in several soap operas in which he managed to convince the public and the critics with his performance. The soap opera Mi querida Isabel was the first soap opera in which Gabriel participated, hence followed Alma Rebelde, Mi destino eres tú, Carita de ángel among others thus leading his most important project, playing Ulises "ugly" in the soap opera Amigas y rivales producer Emilio Larrosa.

In 2002 participates in the soap opera Las vías del amor with the same producer, from the Aracely Arambula and Jorge Salinas.

In 2004 the soap opera Mujer de Madera, produced by Emilio Larrosa, Gabriel makes his first starring get from the Edith Gonzalez, who would later be replaced by Ana Patricia Rojo Jaime Camil and Maria Sorte.

In 2005 following back to Los Angeles where he was taking courses in acting for film, boxing classes and surf on their return to Mexico comes to compete in Dancing with the Stars program.

Then, in 2006, starred in the telenovela La Verdad Oculta produced by Emilio Larrosa, next Galilea Montijo Alejandra Barros and Eduardo Yanez, who after being away for many years of telenovelas returned to join the cast.

In 2007, Gabriel starred in the soap opera Bajo las riendas del amor, which is actually an adaptation of Cuando llega el amor.

In 2008, he joined Querida Enemiga along the side of Ana Layevska Jorge Aravena and Maria Rubio produced by Lucero Suarez.

In 2009 he participated in Sortilegio, a project under the production of Carla Estrada, in which he played Fernando Alanis.

In 2010 participated in the United States of America in the play Sortilegio, el show, based on the Esmas telenovela.

In 2011 he participated in La Fuerza del Destino, production of Rosy Ocampo which giving life to Camilo Galvan, it was led by David Zepeda and Sandra Echeverria with Laisha Wilkins Juan Ferrara, among others.

In 2012 the soap opera starring Un Refugio para el Amor with Zuria Vega, in which he played Rodrigo Torreslanda.

He starred as the protagonist (alongside Gloria Trevi) in Emilio Larrosa's telenovela: Libre para amarte.

Filmography

Films

Television

Awards and nominations


