
#Article: Sam Riegel
#Type: regular article

Samuel Brent Oscar Riegel also known as Sam Regal, or Jack Lingo, (born October 9, 1976) is an American voice actor, writer and director who appears in cartoons, anime and video game series.

Career

He voiced Donatello in the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 2003 series, and Riven in the Nickelodeon series Winx Club. He began his career as a child actor in theater in Virginia, where he landed the role of Gavroche in the musical Les Misérables at the Kennedy Center. He went on to tour with the show in 26 cities across America, eventually moving to New York City to perform in Broadway and off-Broadway shows. In 1994, he graduated from the Professional Children's School on the Upper West Side of Manhattan and enrolled at the University of Virginia, where he was a member of the award-winning a cappella group The Academical Village People. Riegel is voice director for the hit Disney television cartoon series Sofia the First, which stars Ariel Winter. He also voice-directs Disney's Wander Over Yonder and plays one of the show's characters, "Emperor Awesome." Riegel hosts the All Work No Play podcast with fellow voice actor Liam O'Brien. After completing college, he returned to New York City to pursue his voice acting career. He lives and works in Los Angeles, CA.

September 11, 2001 experience

On September 11, 2001, Riegel and his wife witnessed the attacks on the World Trade Center. At one point, the couple were caught in the dust cloud formed by the collapse of the South Tower, but eventually escaped to Battery Park, where they witnessed the collapse of the North Tower in silence. Riegel captured video footage that was featured in several documentaries.

Filmography

Anime

	 AIKa R-16: Virgin Mission - Gusto

	 Bleach - Maki Ichinose, Ruri'iro Kujaku, Ikkaku Madarame (Ep. 104-105)

	 Blue Dragon - Jiro

	 Blue Exorcist - Mephisto Pheles

	 Boys Be - Kyoichi Kanzaki (as Sam Regal)

	 Buso Renkin - Madoka Maruyama

	 Code Geass - Clovis La Britannia, Claudio Darlton

	 Comic Party - Kazuki Sendoh

	 DearS - Hikorou Oikawa

	 Daphne in the Brilliant Blue - Chang

	 Digimon Data Squad - Kudamon

	 Digimon Fusion - BlueMeramon (Ep. 7-9)

	 Dinosaur King - Rasheed (additional voices)

	 Durarara!! - Ryo Takiguchi, Isaac Dian

	 Ergo Proxy - Pull

	 Eureka Seven - Norb (child)

	 Fafner in the Azure - Hiroto Douma

	 Fate/stay night - Shirou Emiya

	 Ghost Slayers Ayashi - Yonekichi (Ep. 17-18)

	 Ghost Talker's Daydream - Souichiro Kadotake

	 Girls Bravo - Mamoru Machida

	 Grenadier - The Senshi of Smiles - Yajiro Kojima

	 Gun Sword - Klatt

	 Gurren Lagann - Viral

	 Haré+Guu - Asio

	 Hellsing Ultimate - Wild Geese (Ep. 6), Vatican Officers (Ep. 8)

	 Honey & Clover - Shinobu Morita

	 Ikki Tousen  - Chuuei Toutaku

	 K - Yashiro Isana, Fox Spirit (Current Colorless King)

	 Kamichu! - Ino

	 Kekkaishi - Kimiya Hachioji (Ep. 25), Koshu, Kyoichi Hiba, Makio, Yukimasa

	 Kill la Kill - Suzuki (Ep. 1)

	 KO Beast - Wan Derbard

	 Kyou Kara Maou  - Gunter, Ryan

	 Lagrange: The Flower of Rin-ne series - Array

	 Lucky Star  - Minoru Shiraishi

	 Magi: The Labyrinth of Magic - Ahbmad Saluja, Spartos, Dorji (4-5)

	 Marmalade Boy - Michael

	 Mega Man Star Force  - Tom Dubius

	 Monster  - Additional voices

	 Naruto - Shino Aburame (Eps. 23-24), Zaku Abumi, Baki, Mubi, Chishima

	 Naruto Shippuden - Baki, Shin, Rinji, Tōfu (Ep. 195)

	 Nura: Rise of the Yokai Clan series - Kiyotsugu Kiyojuji

	 Paranoia Agent - Lil' Slugger, Makoto Kozuka, Shinsuke Hatomura

	 Persona 4: The Animation - Teddie, Shu Nakajima

	 Prince of Tennis - Shuichiro Oishi

	 Pokémon - Chico

	 Redline - Miki

	 Saiyuki Gunlock - Taizou (Ep. 15-16)

	 Samurai Deeper Kyo - Kotaro Fuma

	 Scrapped Princess - Denis

	 Sengoku Basara - Mori Motonari

	 Shaman King - Faust VIII

	 Shingu: Secret of the Stellar Wars - Toshio

	 Stitch! - Hiroman (Season 3)

	 Tales of Vesperia: The First Strike - Flynn Scifo

	 Tenjo Tenge - Dan Inosato, Sanada

	 Texhnolyze  - Kazuho Yoshii

	 The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya - Taniguchi, Mr. Kimidori (Haruhi-chan)

	 Yami no Matsuei - Minase Hijiri and Oriya Mibu

	 Yu-Gi-Oh! (Series/franchise)

	 Anime series - Tristan Taylor (Eps. 1-10), Rex Raptor (seasons 1-3), Arkana.

	 GX - Blaze

	 5D's - Radley

	 ZEXAL - Chills

	 Zatch Bell! - Purio

	 Zetman - Agou Shimura, Black Suit A, Additional Voices

Animation

	 Chaotic - Chaotic Codes = Power, special episode, Donatello

	 Dance-A-Lot Robot - Dance-A-Lot Robot

	 Doc McStuffins - Orville

	 Fresh Beat Band of Spies - Additional Voices

	 Friends of Heartlake City

	 Gormiti - Toby Tripp

	 Happy Monster Band - Raoul

	 Jackie Chan Adventures - Jimmy

	 Mixels - Vampos

	 Pickle and Peanut - Additional Voices

	 Randy Cunningham: 9th Grade Ninja - Additional Voices

	 Sofia the First - Squirrel, Additional Characters

	 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (2003 series) - Donatello, Dr. Chaplin, Shellectro, Zippy Lad

	 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Fast Forward - Dark Don, Triple Threat (Yellow Head)

	 Turtles Forever - Zombie Donatello, Foot Donatello

	 Tron: Uprising - Additional Voices

	 Wander Over Yonder - Emperor Awesome, Additional Voices

	 Winx Club - Acheron, Riven (Nickelodeon dub)

Films

	 A Turtle's Tale 2: Sammy's Escape from Paradise - Jax the jail fish

	 Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs 2 - Additional Voices (uncredited)

	 The Happy Cricket - Christopher / Happy Cricket

	 Khumba - Jock

	 Tiger and Bunny: The Rising - Mark Schneider

	 Turtles Forever - Donatello

	 Zambezia - Hurricanes Birds of Prey

Video games

	 .hack//G.U. vol.1//Rebirth - Silabus

	 .hack//G.U. vol.2//Reminisce - Silabus, News Announcer

	 .hack//G.U. vol.3//Redemption - Silabus, News Announcer

	 Ace Combat 6: Fires of Liberation - Marcus Lampert (Shamrock) (uncredited)

	 Armored Core: For Answer - Noblesse Oblige (uncredited)/Unknown Linx allied with No Count NEXT in hard mode.

	 Atelier Meruru: The Apprentice of Arland - Rufus Falken (uncredited)

	 Batman: Arkham Knight - Officer Beauchamp, Officer DeRogatis, Officer Welch, additional voices

	 BioShock Infinite - Townspeople, Cop 1

	 Bleach: Soul Resurrección - Nnoitra Gilga

	 Blue Dragon - King Jibral, Turbulent Mai (credited as Sam Regal)

	 Castlevania: Order of Ecclesia - Wallman, Blackmore (uncredited)

	 Code of Princess - Allegro (uncredited)

	 Conception II: Children of the Seven Stars - Wake Archus (uncredited)

	 Cross Edge - York Neely

	 Dawn of Mana - Keldric (uncredited)

	 Digimon World Data Squad - Kudamon

	 Dragon's Dogma: Dark Arisen - Barnaby

	 Eternal Poison - Duphaston

	 Eternal Sonata - Allegretto

	 Eureka Seven Vol.1: The New Wave - Sumner Sturgeon (uncredited)

	 Eureka Seven Vol.2: The New Vision - Sumner Sturgeon (uncredited)

	 Fallout New Vegas - Ghouls

	 Final Fantasy Type-0 HD - Additional Voices

	 Final Fantasy IV (Nintendo DS) - Edward Chris von Muir (uncredited)

	 Final Fantasy XIV: A Realm Reborn - Alphinaud Leveilleur (credited as Sam Regal)

	 Fire Emblem: Awakening - Stahl, Donnel

	 Fragile Dreams: Farewell Ruins of the Moon - Shin

	 Gears of War: Judgment - Aftermath Survivor, Survivor Three, Lab Polanski

	 God Hand - Azel, Bruce, Ravel

	 Growlanser: Heritage of War - Krious, Rufus

	 Guilty Gear Xrd - Ky Kiske

	 Kamen Rider: Dragon Knight - Incisor, System Voice

	 Lego Batman 3: Beyond Gotham - Saint Walker, Ambush Bug, Kid Flash

	 Lightning Returns: Final Fantasy XIII - Additional Voices

	 Lunar: Silver Star Harmony - Nash Rumack (uncredited)

	 Mad Max - Additional Voices

	 Metal Gear Solid: Peace Walker - Soldiers, Extras

	 Naruto Shippuden: Dragon Blade Chronicles - Kuroma Tatsushiro

	 ObsCure - Josh Carter

	 Persona 4 Arena - Teddie

	 Persona 4 Golden - Teddie, Shu Nakajima, Various Students

	 Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney - Dual Destinies - Phoenix Wright

	 Resident Evil: The Darkside Chronicles - Steve Burnside

	 Resident Evil: Revelations 2 - Gabriel Chavez

	 Resonance of Fate - Jean-Paulet

	 Revelations: Persona - Masao "Mark" Inaba (2009 remake)

	 Rune Factory 4 - Arthur, Jones

	 Sengoku Basara: Samurai Heroes - Motonari Mori, Yoritsuna Anegakōji

	 Shin Megami Tensei: Devil Summoner: Soul Hackers - Shingo "Six" Sako

	 Shin Megami Tensei: Persona 4 - Shu Nakajima, Various Students (uncredited)

	 Sly Cooper: Thieves in Time - Tennessee Kid Cooper

	 Sonic: Lost World - Zor

	 Soulcalibur V - Additional voices (credited as Sam Regal)

	 Spectral Force 3: Innocent Rage - Diaz

	 Star Ocean: Till the End of Time - Ruddle (uncredited)

	 Tales of Symphonia: Dawn of the New World - Linar

	 Tales of the Abyss - Reid Hershel, Oliver Tatlin, soldiers (uncredited)

	 Tales of the World: Radiant Mythology - Reid Hershel (uncredited)

	 Tales of Vesperia - Flynn Scifo (uncredited)

	 Tales of Xillia - Jude Mathis

	 Tales of Xillia 2 - Jude Mathis

	 The Lego Movie Videogame - Additional Voices

	 TMNT - Donatello, Baxter Stockman (Turtles in Time: Re-Shelled), Foot Soldier (Turtles in Time: Re-Shelled)

	 Time Hollow - Vin, Young Derek (uncredited)

	 Time Crisis 4 - Marcus Black (credited as Jack Lingo in Arcade & uncredited in Console)

	 The Amazing Spider-Man - Spider-Man/Peter Parker

	 The Amazing Spider-Man 2 - Spider-Man/Peter Parker

	 The Guided Fate Paradox - Renya Kagurazaka

	 The Last of Us - Infected

	 The Last Remnant - Anti-Remnant Activist

	 Transformers: War for Cybertron - Starscream

	 Transformers: Fall of Cybertron - Starscream, Snarl (Uncredited), Additional Voices

	 Transformers: Rise of the Dark Spark - Starscream, Autobot Soldier 02

	 Trinity Universe - Kanata

	 Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 - Phoenix Wright

	 Valkyria Chronicles: Behind Her Blue Flame DLC - Otto (uncredited)

	 Warriors Orochi - Musashi Miyamoto (uncredited)

	 Wild Arms 4 - Jeremy (uncredited)

	 World of Warcraft - Caelestrasz/Calen, Azshara's Highborne

Documentary

	 Adventures in Voice Acting - Himself

	 102 Minutes That Changed America - Himself

Live-Action Dubbing

	 Black Lightning - Dmitriy Maykov

	 One Missed Call - Kenji Kawai (Atsushi Ida)

	 The Haunted Lantern - Shinzaburo

	 Violetta - Leon

Web Series

	Critical Role - Scanlan Shorthalt/Himself

Staff Credits

Voice Director

	 .hack//G.U. Vol.1//Rebirth

	 Ace Combat 6: Fires of Liberation

	 AIKa R-16: Virgin Mission

	 Armored Core: for Answer

	 Bleach

	 Boys Be...

	 Daphne in the Brilliant Blue

	 Eternal Poison

	 Eternal Sonata

	 Fallout: New Vegas

	 Ghost Talker's Daydream

	 Jeanne d'Arc

	 Kung Fu Rider

	 Naruto

	 Naruto Shippuden: Ultimate Ninja Storm 2

	 Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney - Dual Destinies

	 Pickle and Peanut

	 Rumiko Takahashi Anthology

	 Sanjay and Craig

	 Shingu: Secret of the Stellar Wars

	 Sofia the First

	 The Third: The Girl with the Blue Eye

	 ToHeart

	 Wander Over Yonder

Script Adaptation

	 AIKa R-16: Virgin Mission

	 Bleach

	 Boys Be...

	 Comic Party

	 Daphne in the Brilliant Blue

	 Megaman Star Force

	 Naruto

	 Rumiko Takahashi Anthology

	 Sengoku Basara: Samurai Heroes

	 Shingu: Secret of the Stellar Wars

	 Stitch! (Season 3)

	 The Third: The Girl with the Blue Eye

	 Tiger & Bunny

	 ToHeart

	 Tweeny Witches


