
#Article: Mireille Enos
#Type: regular article

Mireille Enos (born September 22, 1975) is an American actress. In 2005 she was nominated for a Tony Award for her performance in the 2005 Broadway production of Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?, and in 2007 joined the cast of the HBO drama series Big Love (2007-2010) as twins Kathy and JoDean Marquart.

Enos' breakout role was on the AMC crime drama series, The Killing (2011-14) as Sarah Linden. For her performance in show she was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award and Golden Globe Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series. Enos starred as Karin Lane in the 2013 disaster film World War Z and also appeared in films Gangster Squad (2013), Devil's Knot (2013), Sabotage (2014) and If I Stay (2014).

Early life

Enos was born in Kansas City, Missouri. She is the daughter of Monique, a French teacher, and Jon Goree Enos. Her father is American, from Texas, and is of part Scottish ancestry. Her mother is French. She moved to Houston, Texas, at the age of five, where she attended the High School for the Performing and Visual Arts. Enos studied at Brigham Young University. She was raised in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, but no longer practices (her father was a missionary for the church).

Career

1994-2010

Enos made her screen acting debut in the television film Without Consent (1994). She made her feature film debut with small role in the romantic comedy Someone Like You (2001) starring Ashley Judd. On television she had number of guest-starring parts in numerous shows, including Sex and the City, Strong Medicine, Rescue Me, Without a Trace, Crossing Jordan, CSI: Miami, Medium and Law & Order: Criminal Intent. She also appeared in the several stage productions. Enos appeared in the 2005 Broadway production of Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?. For her performance she was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play, but lost Award to Adriane Lenox.

In 2007, Enos joined the cast of the HBO drama series Big Love about a polygamous family. She played the roles of twin sisters JoDean Marquart and Kathy Marquart. She was regular cast member in the third and fourth seasons.

2011-present

In 2010, Enos was cast in her first lead role in a television series: detective Sarah Linden in the AMC drama series The Killing, based upon the Danish television series Forbrydelsen. She received critical acclaim for that performance, and the first season was praised by most critics. Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter in his review said "It's not until you watch Enos play Sarah for a while that it sinks in - there hasn't been a female American character like her probably ever." Enos received nominations for an Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series, Golden Globe Award for Best Actress - Television Series Drama, and three Saturn Award for Best Actress on Television. The series ended in 2014, after four seasons.After her breakout role in The Killing, Enos began her career in feature films. She played Brad Pitt's wife, Karin Lane, in the zombie thriller film World War Z (2013). The film received positive reviews and was a commercial success, grossing over $540 million. She co-starred as Josh Brolin's character wife in Gangster Squad (2013) and appeared opposite Reese Witherspoon in the crime drama Devil's Knot, based on a true story. In 2014, she appeared in the crime thriller Sabotage directed by David Ayer and later starred in drama film If I Stay directed by R. J. Cutler, based on the novel of the same name by Gayle Forman. The film was released on August 22, 2014. Also in 2014, Enos co-starred alongside Ryan Reynolds in The Captive directed by Atom Egoyan. As lead actress, Enos was cast in the thriller You Were Never Here directed by Camille Thoman.

In March 2015, it was announced that Enos had been cast as lead character in the ABC legal drama series, The Catch, produced by Shonda Rhimes. Later in this month, it was announced that Enos will be star alongside Olivia Cooke in the independent drama film, Katie Says Goodbye.

Personal life

Enos married actor Alan Ruck on January 4, 2008. They have two children: daughter Vesper Vivienne Ruck, born on September 23, 2010, and son Larkin Zouey Ruck, born on July 23, 2014.

Filmography

Film

Television

Stage

Awards and nominations


