
#Article: Soleil Moon Frye
#Type: regular article

Soleil Moon Frye (; born August 6, 1976) is an American actress, director and screenwriter. She began her career as a child actor at the age of 2. When she was 7 years old, Frye won the role of Penelope "Punky" Brewster in the sitcom Punky Brewster. The series, which debuted on NBC in September 1984, earned consistently low ratings but the Punky character was a hit with young children. After NBC canceled the series, it was picked up for the syndication market where it aired for an additional two seasons ending in 1988.

After the series ended, Frye continued her career in guest spots on television and supporting roles in films. She attended The New School during the late 1990s, and directed her first film, Wild Horses in 1998. In 2000, she joined the cast of Sabrina, the Teenage Witch as Roxie King, Sabrina Spellman's (Melissa Joan Hart) roommate and close friend. Frye remained with the series until its end in April 2003. She has since continued her acting career working mainly as a voice actor. Frye also voiced Aseefa in the animated series Planet Sheen.

In 1998, Frye married producer Jason Goldberg, with whom she has three children. She has since opened an organic specialty clothing shop for children, The Little Seed, in Los Angeles. She also hosts a blog and web series which focus on child rearing and women's issues. In 2011, Frye released her first book Happy Chaos: From Punky to Parenting and My Perfectly Imperfect Adventures in Between.Frye is currently the host of Home Made Simple on the Oprah Winfrey Network.

Early life

Frye was born in Glendora, California. Her father is actor Virgil Frye, and her mother is talent agent and caterer Sondra Peluce (née Londy). She has two half-brothers, Sean Frye and Meeno Peluce, both former child actors. Frye's parents divorced when she was two.

Frye was educated at a private school in Los Feliz and attended San Fernando Valley Professional School in Burbank.

Career

Acting

Frye made her acting debut in the 1982 television movie Missing Children: A Mothers Story. In 1983, she had a supporting role in Who Will Love My Children?, another television movie starring Ann-Margret. The following year, she portrayed Elizabeth (Bette) Kovacs in the biographical television movie Ernie Kovacs: Between the Laughter, and appeared in another television movie, Invitation to Hell, directed by Wes Craven.

At the age of seven, Frye beat out over 3,000 girls to win the title role on the NBC sitcom Punky Brewster. The series, which was conceived by NBCs then-head of programming Brandon Tartikoff, premiered in September 1984. Scheduled opposite CBSs highly rated 60 Minutes, the series struggled in the ratings but the character of Punky was popular among children. Frye routinely appeared at parades, participated in an anti-drug walks with then-First Lady Nancy Reagan, and was the honorary chairperson for the National Institute on Drug Abuse. Frye also voiced the lead role in the animated series Its Punky Brewster, which began airing during Punky Brewsters first season. Despite the series low ratings, Brandon Tartikoff decided to renew the show for a second season because it was the highest rated show watched by children 2 to 11 years old. Punky Brewsters second season, which dealt with more serious subject matters such as CPR and first-aid training, drug use and the Just Say No campaign, and the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster, did not improve ratings and NBC canceled the series in April 1986. The series was quickly picked up by Columbia Pictures Television and began airing in first-run syndication. Punky Brewster aired for an additional two seasons, ending in May 1988.

Immediately upon Punky Brewsters end, Frye landed the lead role in the ABC sitcom pilot Cadets, which aired as a summer special on September 25, 1988. The pilot, however, was not picked up. In 1989, Frye hosted the syndicated weekly talk/variety show Girl Talk. Based on the board game of the same name, Frye shared hosting duties with Sarah Michelle Gellar and Rod Brogan. The series was canceled after one season.

During the 1990s, she guest starred on several television series including The Wonder Years, Saved by the Bell, and Friends, and voiced characters for the animated series Tiny Toon Adventures and The Cartoon Cartoon Show. In addition to her television work, Frye has appeared in the films The Liars Club (1993) and Pumpkinhead II: Blood Wings (1995) and in stage productions of Orestes, I Murdered My Mother and The Housekeeper.

From 2000 to 2003, Frye portrayed the character of Roxie King in Sabrina, the Teenage Witch, with her longtime friend and series producer Melissa Joan Hart. During the run of Sabrina, she voiced the character of Zoey in the Disney Channel series The Proud Family and the series 2005 television movie.

In 2004, she voiced Jade, a Bratz character in the direct-to-video release Bratz: Starrin & Stylin. She also voiced the character for the television series, and the video games Bratz Rock Angelz (2005) and Bratz: Forever Diamondz (2006). From 2010 to February 2013, Frye voiced Aseefa in the animated series Planet Sheen.

Directing

In 1996, Frye moved to New York to attend The New School and later directed her first film, Wild Horses (1998).

Frye directed her second film, Sonny Boy, in 2004. The documentary chronicles a two-week trip Frye took with her father, Virgil, who had Alzheimer's disease. Sonny Boy was an official selection at the 27th Starz Denver International Film Festival and won Best Documentary at the San Diego Film Festival.

Other ventures

In 2007, Frye, along with two friends, opened The Little Seed, an environmentally-conscious children's specialty boutique in Los Angeles. The boutique closed in August 2013, and is now an Internet-based business.

In March 2010, Frye and her friend and former Sabrina castmate Melissa Joan Hart launched the "Better Together" campaign for Gain.

In September 2011, Frye released her first book, Happy Chaos: From Punky to Parenting and My Perfectly Imperfect Adventures in Between. In October 2013, she released a party-planning book, Let's Get This Party Started. She also hosted a web series, Her Say, from 2011 to 2012, and currently hosts a blog on her official website, moonfrye.com, both of which deal with women's issues and parenting.

In 2014, Frye co-founded P.S. XO, a company that sells party decoration kits.

Personal life

As a teen, Frye suffered from gigantomastia. She underwent a breast reduction three months before her 16th birthday.

Marriage and children

On October 25, 1998, Frye married television producer Jason Goldberg in a Jewish ceremony (Frye's mother is Jewish, as is Goldberg). Frye and Goldberg have three children: daughters Poet Sienna Rose (born August 2005) and Jagger Joseph Blue (born March 2008), and son Lyric Sonny Roads (born February 2014).

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations


