
#Article: Amber Rose
#Type: regular article

Amber Levonchuck (born October 21, 1983), better known by her stage name Amber Rose, is an American rapper, model, fashion designer and actress.

Early life

Amber Levonchuck was born on October 21, 1983 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, to father Michael Levonchuck, who served in the military for 20 years and her mother, Dorothy Rose. Her father is of Irish and Italian descent and her mother is of Cabo Verdean and Scottish descent. She has one brother named Antonio Hewlett. Rose grew up in South Philadelphia.

Career

Amber Rose performed striptease under the pseudonym "Paris" at the age of 15 after the divorce of her parents to provide for her family.

Rose gained notoriety after posing for a Louis Vuitton print advertisement featuring Kanye West's sneaker line.

In September 2009, Rose announced plans to launch her own eyewear line. She walked the runway at New York Fashion Week for "Celestino," Rose has also made cameos in music videos such as Nicki Minaj's "Massive Attack," Young Jeezy's "Vacation," Wiz Khalifa's "No Sleep," Fabolous' "You Be Killin' Em," and Ludacris' "What Them Girls Like."

She signed with modeling agency Ford Models from 2009 to 2010.

In 2010, she appeared in Russell Simmons' reality show about his two assistants, "Running Russell Simmons". She also starred in a PSA by NOH8 Campaign. In 2011, Amber Rose was a guest judge on Season 3 of RuPaul's Drag Race. She was also a judge on Season 2 of Master of the Mix. In November 2011 she became the spokesperson for Smirnoff and appeared in television ads and billboards for the company's new flavors Whipped Cream and Fluffed Marshmallow.

Rose released her debut single "Fame", which features Wiz Khalifa, in January 10, 2012, followed by a second single, titled "Loaded", released on February 6, 2012. She then appeared in the eleventh track of her ex-husband's album O.N.I.F.C., titled "Rise Above", along with rappers Tuki Carter and Pharrell Williams, who produced the song himself.

In 2012, Rose opened a clothing line with her friend Priscilla Ono called Rose & Ono.

She was managed by Leticia "Tish" Cyrus, mother of singer Miley Cyrus, who is a close friend to Rose and her ex-husband Wiz Khalifa. Rose guest-starred on an episode of Wild 'N Out on MTV2, and had a role as "MaryWanna" in the film School Dance, which was directed by her manager, Nick Cannon in 2014.

Rose partnered with publisher Simon & Schuster for the release of her first book, entitled How to Be a Bad Bitch, in which she offers advice and personal anecdotes on everything from finances and career to love and fashion. The cover features an image shot by famed photographer David LaChapelle.

In 2015 Amber Rose filmed, "Walk Of No Shame with Amber Rose," with Funny Or Die. The viral video helped promote Amber Rose's Slut Walk, which took place on October 3, 2015 in Los Angeles, California.

Personal life

Rose was spotted by rapper Kanye West in the music video "What Them Girls Like." They then began a romantic relationship that lasted from 2008 to 2010.

Rose began dating rapper Wiz Khalifa in early 2011. The couple got engaged on March 1, 2012, and married on July 8, 2013. Their son Sebastian Taylor Thomaz was born on February 21, 2013. Rose, Khalifa, and their son divided their time between homes in Los Angeles and Canonsburg, Pennsylvania. Rose filed for divorce from Khalifa on September 22, 2014, citing irreconcilable differences and plans to take full custody of son Sebastian.

In May 2015, rumors surfaced alleging Rose and rapper Machine Gun Kelly were dating. Kelly later confirmed the speculations. Amber confirmed the relationship as well, during an interview on Real 92.3 on June 2, 2015, saying: "We're dating. We're just getting to know each other," she admitted. "He's a really nice guy. He treats me really, really nice, and I have a blast with him."

Filmography


