
#Article: Kaitlin Olson
#Type: regular article

Kaitlin Willow Olson (born August 18, 1975) is an American actress known for her role as Deandra "Sweet Dee" Reynolds on It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia, which she has starred in since 2005.

Early life

Olson was born in Portland, Oregon, and lived on an island across from Seattle, Washington until the age of eight. Olson later relocated with her family to the Tigard and Tualatin area outside Portland, where she grew up on a farm. Her father, Donald Olson, worked as the publisher of the Portland Tribune. At age twelve, Olson was involved in a serious bike accident that resulted in a fractured skull, which required reconstructive surgery. Olson studied theatre at the University of Oregon, graduating with a B.S. in theatre arts in 1997. After college, she moved to Los Angeles to pursue acting professionally.

Career

Olson was a part of the improvisational group the Groundlings. She toured with the USO to Bosnia, Kosovo, and Norway. She made several guest appearances in films and television series such as Curb Your Enthusiasm, The Drew Carey Show, The Jamie Kennedy Experiment, Out of Practice, Miss Match, Family Guy, and Punk'd. She had a minor role in the film Coyote Ugly.In 2004, she was cast as Deandra "Sweet Dee" Reynolds in the FX sitcom It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia. She also voiced Ethel in the first season of the Comedy Central animated series Brickleberry. She had a recurring role as Hartley Underwood, the "one-armed" neighbor in the FX series The Riches.

Popularity

Olson was named the 2008 "Mailbag Crush" by Sports Illustrated writer Stewart Mandel in his College Football Mailbag SI.com column.

Personal life

Olson married her It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia co-star, Rob McElhenney, in California on September 27, 2008. The couple started dating secretly during the second season of the series. They had their first child, a boy named Axel Lee, on September 1, 2010. Olson went into labor at a Philadelphia Phillies game, and Axel was born in their home as planned. Their second son, Leo Grey McElhenney, was born on April 5, 2012.

Filmography

Film

Television


