
#Article: Stella Creasy
#Type: regular article

Stella Judith Creasy MP (born 5 April 1977) is a British Labour Co-operative politician who has been Member of Parliament for the London constituency of Walthamstow since 2010.

Early life and career

Born in Sutton Coldfield, she is the daughter of Cambridge graduates Corinna Frances Avril (née Martin, on 26 April 1948) and Philip Charles Creasy, both active Labour Party members; her father is a trained opera singer and her mother a headteacher. Her mother, Corinna, attended St. Margaret's School in Bushey, Hertfordshire before going up to Homerton-cum-Newnham College, Cambridge to read education studies where she graduated with a Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.) degree. Her elder brother, Matthew Henry Creasy (born 1974), is an M.A. (Cantab) and D.Phil. (Oxon) and an academic. 

Creasy has aristocratic family connections on her mother's side, including with the Howards, Earls of Carlisle (through whom she is related to Polly Toynbee), the Cayzer family and the present (9th) Viscount Gort who is her fourth cousin.  

After spending early childhood in Manchester, her family moved to Colchester where Creasy attended Colchester County High School for Girls, a grammar school. Although she initially failed the eleven-plus exam, the Creasy family's move south gave her a second chance.Creasy attended Magdalene College, Cambridge where she read Social and Political Sciences before pursuing postgraduate studies at London School of Economics.

In 2006, having already started work as a parliamentary researcher, she completed her thesis entitled Understanding the lifeworld of social exclusion, receiving a PhD degree in Social Psychology from University of London. Creasy also received the Richard Titmuss Award for her academic psychology papers.

Early political career

Creasy worked as a lobbyist and PR consultant, becoming head of Public Affairs at the Scout Association.

A former deputy director of a think tank, Involve, she worked as a researcher and speech writer for various Labour government ministers, notably Douglas Alexander, Charles Clarke and Ross Cranston.

Elected as a councillor in Waltham Forest, Creasy later became the borough's Deputy Mayor before serving as Mayor for four months prior to her election to the House of Commons.

Creasy was a member of the Young Fabians and served on its executive. In 2009 she co-wrote, with Rachel Reeves, a pamphlet for the Young Fabians entitled The New Progressives.

In Parliament

In 2010 Creasy was selected from an all-female shortlist as the Labour Party candidate for Walthamstow, being elected to Parliament at the 2010 general election, retaining the seat for her party as successor to the previous Labour MP, Neil Gerrard, who had stood down from Parliament.

Payday loans

Creasy has campaigned for better regulation of payday loans companies. In an article published by The Guardian, she stated that just six companies controlled lending to 90% of the seven million Britons without a bank account or credit card. Her disclosure that the average cost of credit charged to these customers was 272% APR, as in the rest of Europe, and that there was a fourfold increase in payday loans since the start of the recession in 2008 led to cross-party parliamentary support for a cap. Creasy also highlighted in a speech to the House of Commons the lack of competition in the market, leading to Government support for a cap of loans which exploit the poor, which in some cases reached 4000%. APR.

In 2012, a Wonga employee used company equipment to make offensive personal attacks against Creasy. Wonga made an "immediate and unreserved apology" following these malicious attacks, and Creasy also managed to get the firm to promote one of her constituency events in aid of struggling families.

Twitter

At the end of July 2013 on her Twitter timeline, along with the feminist campaigner Caroline Criado-Perez, Creasy received numerous rape threats and other misogynistic messages; this brought the two women together, Criado-Perez having successfully lobbied the Bank of England to feature a woman on the reverse of £10 bank notes.

Creasy wrote in an article published on 27 July: "Twitter tell me we should simply block those who 'offend us', as though a rape threat is matter of bad manners, not criminal behaviour." She also appeared on Newsnight on 30 July 2013 with Toby Young, the Conservative commentator, over the validity of addressing harassment on the social networking site. Young has objected to Twitter's subsequent change in policy, writing that the company, "shouldn't change its abuse policy in response to being brow-beaten by a politician". On 2 September 2014 at the City of London Magistrates' Court, Peter Nunn was found guilty of sending menacing messages to Creasy, and was subsequently jailed for eighteen weeks.

Labour Party deputy leadership

Creasy was re-elected in 2015 with a substantially increased majority, securing a 17% increase in the share of the vote.

Following the 2015 general election defeat, Creasy announced her intention to stand as a candidate in the Labour Party deputy leadership election. She had gained the minimum 35 required nominees to be included on the ballot by noon on 17 June.

Creasy gained 26% of the vote and came second, being beaten by Tom Watson.

Outside interests

Creasy has long been a fan of Indie band The Wedding Present and wrote an essay to accompany the re-release of their album Seamonsters in 2012.

Creasy is a supporter of Manchester United football club.


