
#Article: Juliet Aubrey
#Type: regular article

Juliet Aubrey (born 17 December 1966) is an award winning English actress, of Theatre, Film, and Television. Amongst other roles she is particularly celebrated for playing Dorothea in Middlemarch, and Helen Cutter in Primeval.

Career

Born in Fleet, Hampshire, Aubrey attended King's College London from 1984, where she studied Classics and Archaeology. While there, however, her love of acting grew, and during a year studying in Italy where she joined a travelling theatre company, Aubrey decided to apply for drama school on her return. She did, and went on to train for three years at the Central School of Speech and Drama.

Her first job was with the Oxford Stage Company playing Miranda in The Tempest. The Italian director Roberto Faenza gave Juliet her first film role playing opposite Jean Hughes Anglade in Look to the Sky, a film produced by Elda Ferri, and set during the Nazi Holocaust. Juliet won the Davide Donatelli award for Best Actress for her role as Hannah. Antony Page and Louis Marks then cast Juliet as Dorothea in the BBC adaptation of Middlemarch opposite Rufus Sewell, for which she won a BAFTA for Best Actress, and the Broadcasting Press Guild for Best Actress. She then joined Haris Pasovic's Sarajevo Theatre Company. She appeared in several plays with the company, all created through the actors' improvisation. She continued to build her career as a theatre actress, appearing next in Trevor Nunn's Summerfolk and Katie Mitchell's Ivanov at The National, Tim Crouch's An Oak Tree for Karl James at The Soho Theatre, and Three Sisters, Twelfth Night and The Collection all for Chris White. Michael Winterbottom then cast her opposite Robert Carlyle and James Nesbitt in the much acclaimed film Go Now.

Aubrey's subsequent films include Winterbottom's Welcome to Sarajevo, Stephen Poliakoff's Food of Love—for which she won Best Actress at La Baule European Film Festival—Faenza's The Lost Lover, Giacomo Campiotti's Time to Love, Richard Eyre's Iris, Fernando Meirelles's Constant Gardener and Brian Gibson's Still Crazy, nominated for two Golden Globes. Other features include Matt Lipsey's Caught in the Act, and Mat Cod's Super Eruption. Television work includes The White Queen, Criminal Justice, Vera, Hunted, and the highly acclaimed Five Daughters.

She plays Joy Dangerfield, a follower of Marie Stopes, in the second series of The Village, and in 2015 she will appear in Scott Hicks' fantasy-romance film Fallen and in Mitch Davis' film Stuck.

Personal life

Aubrey was born and brought up in Fleet, Hampshire, the daughter of Dr. Roland and Sylvia Aubrey. She is half Welsh and half English. She had two siblings. Her elder sister Sian died in 2011 after falling from the roof of her home in Manhattan, New York, where she lived with her husband, Thomas Hurd, and five children.

In 2001, Aubrey married production designer Steve Ritchie, whom she met several years earlier while filming in Newcastle upon Tyne. They have two daughters, Blythe and Lola-Blue. She is the cousin of David Howell Evans (The Edge), guitarist of the U2.

Aubrey is an Ambassador for Women for Women International, the charity which helps women survivors of war rebuild their lives. She is an active campaigner working to highlight global violence against women.

Filmography


