
#Article: Megyn Kelly
#Type: regular article

Megyn Marie Kelly (born November 18, 1970), formerly known as Megyn Kendall, is a journalist, former attorney, and news pundit and political commentator on the Fox News Channel. , Kelly hosts The Kelly File on weekdays from the network's New York City headquarters. She previously hosted America Live. Prior to that, Kelly co-hosted America's Newsroom along with Bill Hemmer. From 2007 to 2012, the two also hosted Fox News Channel's New Year's Eve specials, All American New Year. She was included in the 2014 Time list of the 100 most influential people.

Early life and education

Kelly was born in Syracuse, New York to Edward Kelly, who taught education at the State University of New York at Albany, and Linda, a homemaker. She is of Italian descent on her mother's side and Irish descent on her father's. Kelly's father died when she was 15 years old. 

Kelly attended Tecumseh Elementary School. At age 9, her family moved to the Albany, New York suburb of Delmar, where she attended Bethlehem Central High School. After high school, she obtained an undergraduate degree in political science at Syracuse University and earned a J.D. from Albany Law School in 1995.  Kelly is Roman Catholic.

Career

In law

Kelly was an associate in the Chicago office of law firm Bickel & Brewer LLP, during which time she co-wrote an article for the American Bar Association's journal, Litigation, called "The Conflicting Roles of Lawyer as Director". She later joined Jones Day for nine years, where one of her clients was the credit bureau Experian.

In journalism

In 2003, Kelly moved to Washington, D.C., where she was hired by the ABC affiliate WJLA-TV as a general assignment reporter. While there, she covered significant national and local events, including live coverage of the confirmation hearings for U.S. Supreme Court Justice Samuel A. Alito, Jr. and Chief Justice John G. Roberts; the retirement of Justice Sandra Day O'Connor; the death of Chief Justice William Rehnquist; and the 2004 presidential election. After working as a journalist for WJLA, Kelly then applied for a job at Fox News Channel in 2004. CNN president Jonathan Klein would later regret not gaining Kelly as a reporter in the beginning of her career, as she was "the one talent you’d want to have from somewhere else".

Kelly contributed legal segments for Special Report with Brit Hume and hosted her own legal segment, Kelly's Court, during Weekend Live. She appeared on a weekly segment on The O'Reilly Factor and occasionally filled in for Greta Van Susteren on On the Record, where most of her reporting focused on legal and political matters. She occasionally contributed as an anchor, but more often as a substitute anchor on weekends. On February 1, 2010, Kelly began hosting her own two hour show, America Live, replacing Fox News' previous show The Live Desk. She has been a guest-panelist on Fox News' late-night satire program Red Eye w/ Greg Gutfeld. In 2010, viewership for America Live increased by 20%, averaging 1,293,000 viewers, and increased by 4% in the 25-54 age demographic, averaging 268,000 viewers.

Kelly received media attention for her coverage of the results of the 2012 United States presidential election. On November 6, 2012, the night of the election, Fox News projected that Obama would win a second term after part of the results had been released. In response to Karl Rove's opposition to this projection, Kelly asked Rove, "Is this just math that you do as a Republican to make yourself feel better? Or is this real?"

Kelly left as host of America Live in the beginning of July 2013 for maternity leave and began hosting The Kelly File, airing weekdays at 9 p.m. EDT, on October 7, 2013.

In December 2013, remarks made by Kelly in reaction to a Slate article drew controversy. On The Kelly File, she said, "For all you kids watching at home, Santa just is white, but this person is just arguing that maybe we should also have a black Santa," adding, "But Santa is what he is, and just so you know, we’re just debating this because someone wrote about it." Kelly also stated that Jesus was a white man later in the segment. Soon after, Jon Stewart, Stephen Colbert, Rachel Maddow, Josh Barro, and others satirized her remarks. Two days later, she made additional on-air statements, characterizing her original comments as "tongue-in-cheek", but conceded that the skin color of Jesus is "far from settled".

In June 2015, Kelly interviewed Jim Bob Duggar and Michelle Duggar, the parents of 19 Kids and Counting fame, in relation to their son Josh Duggar's alleged molestation of five girls in 2002. She later also interviewed two of their daughters, Jill and Jessa.

Moderator of Cleveland Republican presidential debate

Kelly's moderation of the first Republican Party presidential debate of the 2016 election was well received by television critics and others, although some conservatives took issue with the pointed tone of the debate. Kelly asked presidential candidate Donald Trump about disparaging comments he has made toward women. After Trump responded with personal comments directed toward Kelly, he was disinvited from the annual RedState gathering amid considerable controversy about the exchange. Kelly responded by saying she would not "apologize for doing good journalism".

Accolades

She was included in the 2014 Time list of the 100 most influential people.

Personal life

Kelly first married Daniel Kendall, an anesthesiologist, on September 29, 2001. That marriage ended in divorce in 2006. 

On March 1, 2008, she married Douglas Brunt, President and CEO of Authentium, who became a full-time writer and novelist. They have three children.

Politically, Kelly identifies as an independent, and has voted for both Democrats and Republicans.


