
#Article: Kimberly Stewart
#Type: regular article

 Kimberly Alana Stewart (born August 21, 1979), is a socialite, reality TV star, model, and fashion designer. She is the daughter of singer Rod Stewart and actress and model Alana Stewart.

Early life

Kimberly Stewart was born on August 21, 1979, in Holmby Hills, Los Angeles, California. She is the second of Rod Stewart′s eight children and second of Alana Stewart′s three children. After graduating from Buckley school in Sherman Oaks, California, she spent several years studying acting with coaches Janet Alhanti and Ivana Chubbuck. Stewart studied in London with theatre coaches Barbara Houseman (Central School of Speech and Drama/Royal Shakespeare Company coach) and Penny Dyer (Rada and Central School of Speech & Drama coach) and with singing coach Mark Meylan, who works with The Royal National Theatre.

Career

Acting

Stewart has worked as an actress and brand ambassador. Stewart's American television work includes a leading role in Going to California, written by Scott Rosenberg and directed by Ted Demme, and appearing in one episode of Judd Apatow's series, "Undeclared." Stewart′s first film was James Toback′s, Black and White, which also starred Robert Downey, Jr., and Jared Leto. In 2011 Stewart starred in the movie Homecoming, written and directed by Sean Hackett.

Fashion

Stewart has appeared on the covers for Tatler and German Vanity Fair, which Bryan Adams shot; and she has worked with fashion companies including Tommy Hilfiger, American Vogue, L’uomo Vogue, Elle, Italian Vogue, Vanity Fair, MaxMara, Richard Tyler,  Catherine Malandrino, underwear line Ultimo (in a £100,000 deal),  Tatler, InStyle, House of Field, and Chrome Hearts.

She realized an early ambition, at age 19, when she launched her own fashion collection - “Pinky Starfish.” Known for its dresses made from French vintage fabrics, the range was sold in Tracey Ross, Lisa Kline and Barney’s. She started her own clothing label, but it foundered because she couldn't get the supply chain to work.

Modeling

On September 9, 2008 the Atlanta-based band, "Elevation", released the music video for its single, “Razoreyes", starring Stewart, marking a first in her career.

Stewart posed nude in 2008 in the British society magazine Tatler, along with Peaches Geldof, daughter of the Boomtown Rats′ Bob Geldof, and Leah Wood, daughter of the Rolling Stones′ Ronnie Wood. The photographer was Canadian rocker and photographer Bryan Adams. Stewart had previously posed nude with a crucifix in Italian Vogue, dismaying the Vatican.

Personal life

In 2005, Stewart became engaged to one of the stars of the MTV reality show Laguna Beach, Talan Torriero, after knowing him just a few weeks. At the time, he was 19 and she was 26.  The couple called off their engagement less than two weeks after announcing it.

On April 11, 2011, Benicio del Toro's publicist announced that Stewart was pregnant with his child, although the two were not a couple. Stewart gave birth to a daughter, Delilah Genoveva Stewart del Toro, on August 21, 2011. Delilah is Rod Stewart's first grandchild.

Filmography

	 Film

	 Television

	 Music video


