
#Article: Eric Dane
#Type: regular article

Eric Dane (born November 9, 1972) is an American actor. After appearing in television roles throughout the 2000s, he became known for playing Dr. Mark "McSteamy" Sloan on the medical drama television series Grey's Anatomy, as well as films, co-starring in Marley & Me, Valentine's Day, and Burlesque. He currently stars as Commander Tom Chandler in the apocalyptic drama The Last Ship.

Early life

Dane was born in San Francisco, California to a homemaker mother, Leah, and an interior designer/architect father. He has a younger brother. Dane was raised in his mother's Jewish religion (he had a Bar Mitzvah ceremony). He attended Sequoia High School in Redwood City, California, from 1987 to 1990, and San Mateo High School in San Mateo, California, from 1990 to 1991, where he graduated. Dane was an athlete in high school, playing on the Boys' Varsity water polo team, but decided to pursue a career in acting after appearing in a school production of Arthur Miller's All My Sons.

Career

In 1993, Dane moved to Los Angeles, where he played small roles in the television series Saved by the Bell, The Wonder Years, Roseanne, and Married... with Children, among others. But in 2000, he was signed for a recurring role in Gideon's Crossing, and followed this with a two-season run in Charmed. His made-for-television film credits included two biopics, Serving in Silence (about Margarethe Cammermeyer's experiences in the military), and Helter Skelter, in which he portrayed Charles "Tex" Watson, a member of the Manson family.

Dane's first major feature film appearance was in The Basket. He also appeared in Zoe, Duncan, Jack & Jane, Sol Goode, Feast, X-Men: The Last Stand, and starred in Open Water 2.In 2005, Dane guested as Dr. Mark Sloan (nicknamed "McSteamy" by Meredith Grey) in "Yesterday," the eighteenth episode of the second season of the ABC medical drama Grey's Anatomy. Positive audience reaction to the character led to Dane's becoming a regular in the show's third season. His first appearance in the season, in which he walked out of the bathroom soaking wet and wearing only a strategically placed towel, was labeled a "watercooler moment."Dane resigned from the show after the end of season 8 but appeared on the first two episodes of season 9.

In December 2006, he starred in the A&E television film Wedding Wars as the brother of a gay man (played by John Stamos) who goes on strike in support of marriage equality.Dane, alongside Patrick Dempsey, appeared in the same big-screen project, the 2010 romantic comedy Valentine's Day. The Garry Marshall-directed film followed five interconnecting stories about Los Angelenos anticipating (or in some cases dreading) the holiday.

In October 2012, Dane joined the main cast of the Michael Bay produced, TNT drama series The Last Ship. He is also credited as a producer on the show.

Personal life

Dane married actress Rebecca Gayheart on October 29, 2004. They have two daughters together: Billie Beatrice (born March 3, 2010) and Georgia Geraldine (born December 28, 2011).

Dane made headlines when he participated in a nude tape with his wife and Kari Ann Peniche. Dane checked himself into rehab in June 2011; he entered a California treatment center to rectify his problem with dependency on prescription drugs after suffering a sports injury.

Filmography

Film

Television


