
#Article: Dominic Noonan
#Type: regular article

Domenyk Lattlay-Fottfoy (birth name Dominic Noonan, born 1964) is an English gangster. With his brother Desmond "Dessie" Noonan, he headed a criminal organisation or "crime firm" in Manchester, England during the 1980s and 1990s and is a member of one of Manchester's most infamous crime families.

Noonan has more than 40 convictions for a wide range of offences including armed robbery, police assault, possession of firearms, prison escape and fraud and has spent 22 years in prisons across Britain. Although Noonan is alleged to have been involved in a number of gangland murders, he has never been convicted.

Name

He changed his name to Domenyk Lattlay-Fottfoy by deed poll. His adopted surname is an acronym for "Look After Those That Look After You - Fuck Off Those That Fuck Off You".

Personal life

The Noonan family first rose to notoriety in the Manchester gang scene after the murder of "White Tony" Johnson, the leader of the Cheetham Hill Gang, who was gunned down in 1991. Noonan has a son, Bugsy.

On 9 August 2011, during the 2011 England riots, Noonan was caught on film talking to looters in Manchester city centre. The Daily Mail has claimed that Noonan knew Mark Duggan, whose shooting to death by officers from the Metropolitan Police indirectly led to the 2011 England riots. Duggan was a nephew of his brother Desmond's second ex-wife.

The Manchester Evening News on 12 August 2011, reporting the looting cases, reads "Domenyk Noonan, 47, who has changed his name to Lattlay-Fottfoy, from Wellington Road South, Stockport, appeared in court charged with handling stolen alcohol and cigarettes. He did not enter a plea and was remanded in custody."

On 27 October 2012, Noonan was charged under his adopted name by Greater Manchester Police in connection with the alleged rape and false imprisonment of a fifteen-year-old boy in Manchester. He was recalled to prison because the charges amounted to a breach of the conditions of his release on an earlier unrelated matter. The charges were dropped in October 2013, at which point he was still being held in custody. The Crown Prosecution Service said that "This has not been an easy decision, balancing the rights and expectations of the complainant and the need to ensure a fair trial. In all the circumstances, we cannot continue with the prosecution ..."

Documentary

Noonan and his brother Desmond were the subject of a 2006 documentary A Very British Gangster (or MacIntyre's Underworld) directed by Donal MacIntyre. During the introduction to the documentary Donal MacIntyre describes Dominic Noonan as "a dangerous, maniacal Christopher Biggins".

During the documentary Dominic is asked by MacIntyre about rumours that he is homosexual. "Without missing a beat Noonan openly admits that he's gay."


