
#Article: Estelle Lefébure
#Type: regular article

Estelle Lefébure (; born 11 May 1966) is a French actress and model. She was one of the top fashion models in the 1980s and 1990s. Estelle Lefebure, as she was known in the early '80s, was discovered by George Gallier and managed by him exclusively at Prestige Models in Paris, France. George Gallier then moved to New York City to start American Model Management, and managed her career until 1991. Her national recognition was immediate after the first Guess (clothing) campaign shot by Wayne Mazer in the early '80s; she then shot several covers of American Vogue (magazine) with photographer Richard Avedon, several covers of American Elle (magazine) with Marc Hispard, Gilles Ben Simon and Bill King. French Elle magazine model editor Odile Saron was also instrumental in helping Estelle's career take off. In 1991, she switched agencies, moving from American Model Management to Elite, moved to California, and married singer David Hallyday. During her marriage with David Hallyday, she was known professionally as Estelle Hallyday.

Model career

She began modeling at age 19. Over the years, she has appeared in advertisements for Guess?, Cartier, Christian Dior, Revlon, Lord & Taylor, and Samsung. In 1993, she appeared in the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue. In 1994, she was named one of the "50 most beautiful people" by People. In 1999, she was one of the candidates to become the official model for the French national symbol Marianne but ultimately lost to Laetitia Casta.

Acting career

In 1994 she earned her first film role in the French comedy film Grosse Fatigue. In 2001 she portrayed a model for Gaultier in the Gabriel Aghion comedy Absolutely Fabulous and in 2007 she earned her first lead role in the horror film Frontière(s).

Music career

Lefébure sang on the soundtrack of the Comedy Drama Le bal des actrices film, the song "La pomme" and duet with Maïwenn Le Besco.

Personal life

She was married to singer David Hallyday from September 1989 to 2000. The couple had two children: Emma and llona. She was also married to French TV and radio host Arthur from February 2004 to April 2008. Lefébure also has a son, Giuliano, born on 29 November 2010, with her partner Pascal, a restaurateur.

Filmography


