
#Article: Emraan Hashmi
#Type: regular article

Emraan Hashmi (; born Emraan Anwar Hashmi; 24 March 1979) is an Indian film actor who appears in Hindi language films. Hashmi has received three Filmfare Award nominations, and has established himself as a leading contemporary actor of Hindi cinema.

Before starting his career as an actor, Hashmi worked as an assistant director for the 2002 horror film Raaz. The following year, he made his acting debut with a leading role in the crime thriller Footpath and followed it with the erotic thriller Murder (2004), which emerged as a box office success. Hashmi subsequently garnered praise for his performance in several critically and commercially successful films such as; Zeher (2005), Gangster (2006), Awarapan (2007), Jannat (2008), Raaz: The Mystery Continues (2009), Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai (2010), The Dirty Picture (2011), Murder 2 (2011), Dil Toh Baccha Hai Ji (2011), Jannat 2 (2012), Shanghai (2012), Raaz 3 (2012), Ek Thi Daayan(2013) and Hamari Adhuri Kahani (2015). 

Early life and background

Emraan Hashmi was born into a Muslim family on 24 March 1979 to Anwar Hashmi and Mahira Hashmi. Anwar Hashmi was also an actor, and was the son of actress Purnima Das Verma (born Meherbhano Mohammad Ali). Purnima Das Verma was the sister of Shirin Mohammad Ali. He is the nephew of producers Mahesh Bhatt and Mukesh Bhatt, and the cousin of director Mohit Suri, actress Pooja Bhatt, actor Rahul Bhatt and actress Alia Bhatt. Hashmi studied at Sydenham College, Mumbai and University of Mumbai.

Career

2003-2007: Debut and breakthrough

Hashmi made his acting debut in 2003, with Vikram Bhatt's thriller Footpath. Co-starring alongside Aftab Shivdasani and Bipasha Basu, he portrayed the role of Raghu Shrivastav, a gangster. His performance in the film was appreciated by critics; Gaurav Malani described him as the "scene-stealer" and praised his mannerisms. The following year he featured in Anurag Basu's erotic thriller Murder with Mallika Sherawat and Ashmit Patel. Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama said about his performance, "Emraan Hashmi is fantastic in a role that seems tailormade for him. Enacting the role of an obsessive lover with flourish, there's no denying that the narrative gets a major impetus thanks to Emraan's performance." Murder emerged as a financial success, with a domestic total of , becoming the ninth-highest grossing film of the year in India.

Hashmi next starred in Anurag Basu's romance Tumsa Nahin Dekha opposite Dia Mirza. While shooting the film, Basu was diagnosed with blood cancer, so producer-director Mahesh Bhatt completed it. Although the film did not succeed at the box office, his portrayal of Daksh Mittal (a young millionaire who falls in love with a bargirl) was generally well received. A review of his performance in BBC Online noted that he was "becoming fabulous with every film."

In 2005, Hashmi appeared in Mohit Suri's romantic thriller Zeher, co-starring Shamita Shetty and Udita Goswami. His portrayal of Siddharth Mehra (a chief of police who is jealous of his wife's professional success) met with positive reviews from critics. Patchy N of Rediff.com wrote, "Emraan Hashmi has done a passable job, except for the scenes where his character gets angry. The young man yells so loudly that he could well compete with a Sunny Deol!". The film emerged as a moderate success, earning over  in India. He then starred in Aditya Datt's romance Aashiq Banaya Aapne and Vivek Agnihotri's crime thriller Chocolate; both films performed poorly at the box office.

Hashmi then took a supporting role in Mohit Suri's thriller Kalyug, alongside Kunal Khemu, Smilie Suri, Amrita Singh, Ashutosh Rana and Deepal Shaw. Based on the sex industry, the film depicted the devastating effect that non-consensual pornographic films have on the subjects. Hashmi featured as Ali Bhai, a man who runs a sex shop. His performance garnered positive reviews from critics, with Taran Adarsh writing, "Emraan Hashmi makes a brief appearance and the actor is, like always, highly competent." Kalyug was a moderate success in India.

Hashmi's first film in 2006 was Anant Mahadevan's thriller Aksar with Udita Goswani and Dino Morea. The film was a profitable production, but met with negative reviews from critics. He next appeared in Anurag Basu's romantic thriller Gangster, co-starring Kangana Ranaut and Shiney Ahuja. The film emerged as an economic success, grossing over  in India. Hashmi positive reviews for his portrayal of an undercover detective called Aakash; Rediff.com's Raja Sen wrote, "His character is an understated one, and Hashmi manages to keep it that way. There is no unnecessary bluster or melodrama, and he does a pretty believable job. There is something lazy about his acting, by which I mean he makes the job look easy." For the film, Hashmi received his first Filmfare nomination for Best Performance in a Negative Role. He then acted in the crime thriller The Killer (adapted from the 2004 film Collateral) and the romance Dil Diya Hai. Both these films failed critically and commercially.

In 2007, Hashmi appeared in three films. He first starred in the comedy Good Boy Bad Boy alongside Tusshar Kapoor, Isha Sharvani and Tanushree Dutta. The film flopped at the box office and received poor reviews. He then featured opposite Mrinalini Sharma and Shriya Saran in Mohit Suri's romantic thriller Awarapan. Hashmi was cast as the protagonist Shivam, a gangster with a tragic past. Although the film underperformed at the box office, it opened to positive reviews and Hashmi's performance was well received by critics. Writing for The Hindustan Times, critic Khalid Mohamed described it as "intense and believable". Subhash K Jha wrote, "... Emraan Hashmi is an actor who conceals more than he reveals on screen. There is an inherent pain in his personality that this film taps better than anything he has done earlier. This film marks the emergence of a major talent." His final release of the year was the thriller The Train, which also underperformed. Only Awarapan was a both commercial and critical success becoming the best film of his career.

2008-2012: Commercial success and stardom

His only film in 2008 was Kunal Deshmukhs Jannat, a love story set against the backdrop of match fixing. Co-starring alongside Sonal Chauhan, Javed Sheikh and Sameer Kochhar, Hashmi was cast as Arjun Dixit, a bookmaker. His performance was appreciated by critics; Taran Adarash commented that "the actor displays the gamut of emotions with aplomb, he changes expressions like a chameleon changes colors. Jannat is yet another turning point in his career." The film emerged as a commercial success in India, with revenues of over .

In 2009, Hashmi appeared in Mohit Suris supernatural horror Raaz - The Mystery Continues, alongside Kangana Ranaut and Adhyayan Suman. The films domestic collection exceeded , and emerged as a success. Hashmis portrayal of a painter attracted favourable reviews; The Times of Indias Nikhat Kazmi wrote, "Emraan Hashmi is fast emerging as the Colin Farrell of Indian cinema: completely mercurial, eclectic and unpredictable. As the brooding, prescient painter, who paints death on his canvas and falls in love with one of subjects, he is suitably aggrieved, desperate and afraid." He then starred opposite Soha Ali Khan in Kunal Deshmukhs Tum Mile, a love story set against the backdrop of the 2005 Maharashtra floods. The film performed poorly at the box office.

The following year, Hashmi featured in Milan Luthrias period action-drama Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai with an ensemble cast including Ajay Devgan, Randeep Hooda, Kangana Ranaut and Prachi Desai. The picture, which depicted the rise of organised crime in Mumbai, saw Hashmi play Shoaib Khan, a character inspired by real-life gangster Dawood Ibrahim. With a domestic revenue of over , Once Upon A Time in Mumbaai emerged as a hit, and received a positive critical reception. For his performance, Hashmi earned positive reviews from critics and received a Best Supporting Actor nomination at the 56th Filmfare Awards. Blessy Chettiar of Daily News and Analysis described him as "top class". Komal Nahta remarked, "This is easily Emraans best performance so far. If he is cute in the romantic scenes, he is believably tough in the action and dramatic scenes." His next release was Mohit Suris thriller Crook, based on the violence against Indians in Australia controversy. However the film performed poorly and was panned by critics.

In 2011, Hashmi first appeared in Madhur Bhandarkars romantic comedy Dil Toh Baccha Hai Ji, alongside Ajay Devgan, Omi Vaidya, Shazahn Padamsee, Tisca Chopra and Shruti Hassan. The film underperformed and received mixed reviews from critics, as did Hashmis performance. He next featured in Mohit Suris slasher thriller Murder 2, alongside Jacqueline Fernandez, Prashant Narayanan and Sulagna Panigrahi. The film, as well as his performance generated mixed reviews from critics. Shubhra Gupta of The Indian Express wrote, "Hashmi gets to do what he does best, glowering at the men, bedding the ladies, and towards the end, going head to head with the bad guy ... he goes through the film with his usual smart one-liners containing equal amounts of bluster and fluster." Despite this, Murder 2 was a major success; with a domestic revenue of over , the film emerged as a blockbuster.

Hashmis final film in 2011 was Milan Luthrias biopic The Dirty Picture, featuring Vidya Balan as the controversial Indian actress Silk Smitha, alongside Naseeruddin Shah and Tusshar Kapoor. He was cast as Abraham, the narrator, who proclaims himself to be the protagonists biggest enemy. The film opened to critical acclaim and Hashmis performance was appreciated; CNN-IBNs Rajeev Masand wrote, "Emraan Hashmi is appropriately restrained as Abraham, a director who believes in film as art, and who abhors the idea of inserting steamy numbers in his movie to lure in the crowds." However, several critics were sceptical about his role in the film; Soumyadipta Banerjee from Daily News and Analysis considered it "out of place". The Dirty Picture emerged as a commercial success with a worldwide revenue of over .In 2012, Hashmi appeared in Kunal Deshmukhs crime thriller Jannat 2 with Randeep Hooda and Esha Gupta. It was initially titled "Informer" but was later changed to the current title, making it a follow-up film to Jannat (2008). The film generated mixed reviews from critics, though was a success at the box office. He then starred alongside Abhay Deol, Prosenjit Chatterjee and Kalki Koechlin in Dibakar Banerjees Shanghai, an adaptation of writer Vassilis Vassilikoss novel Z and the 1969 French film of the same name. Set in a fictional town called Bharat Nagar, the political thriller traced corruption in India. The film opened to critical acclaim, and Hashmi received unanimous praise for his portrayal of Joginder Parmar, a videographer who sometimes shoots porn films. Madhureeta Mukherjee of The Times of India wrote that Hashmi "looks the part and pulls off an act he should be proud of." Raja Sen described it as one of his best performances and wrote, "Emraan Hashmi, delivers a knockout punch as he masters a complicated role" and called it as "the year’s finest, bravest and most consistent performance." He received his second Best Supporting Actor nomination at the 58th Filmfare Awards for his performance.

Hashmis next appearance was for Vikram Bhatts supernatural horror Raaz 3D, alongside Bipasha Basu and Esha Gupta. Though a commercial success, the film and his performance received mostly negative reviews; critic Kunal Guha commented, "Hashmi takes his role as seriously as he could but his efforts couldnt exorcise the devilishly terrible plot from spelling doom for this film." Lisa Tsering of The Hollywood Reporter wrote, "The swarthy Hashmi ... does a forgettable job. His final film of the year was Shamin Desais delayed thriller Rush, which failed at the box office.

2013-present

In 2013, Hashmi was first seen in Ekta Kapoor and Vishal Bhardwaj's supernatural thriller Ek Thi Daayan, alongside Konkona Sen Sharma, Huma Qureshi and Kalki Koechlin. Critical opinion on the film was mostly positive, and Hashmi's performance also drew appreciation. Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV mentioned that Hashmi "gives the character of the haunted magician just that - a haunted feel that is just apt," whilst Shubhra Gupta called his performance "consistent", adding that he "is a performer who keeps getting better". Hashmi's second appearance was for Raj Kumar Gupta's comic-thriller Ghanchakkar opposite Vidya Balan. Critics were divided in their judgment of the film, as well as Hashmi's performance. Sneha May Francis of Emirates 24/7 wrote that "Emraan Hashmi spins one of his acting career’s most understated, yet imposing performances. He crafts character's predicaments - his anger, frustration and suspicions - with effortless charm." Rajeev Masand was more critical of his performance, reflecting that he "struggles to shine under the limited scope of his role." At the box office, both Ek Thi Daayan and Ghanchakkar underperformed. In 2014, Hashmi firstly starred in Kunal Deshmukh's Raja Natwarlal and Rensil D'Silva's Ungli, both of which flopped at the box office, with the latter being Hashmi's 5th consecutive failure at the box office.

In 2015, Hashmi appeared in two films. Mr. X was a disaster at the box office among with negative reviews, the other being the long awaited Hamari Adhuri Kahani, opposite Vidya Balan for the third time. It was commercially average despite getting mixed reviews by critics although it received positive reactions by the audience.

He has finished work on Academy Award winning director Danis Tanovic's Tigers which is expected to release in 2016.He has also signed Remo D'Souza's tentatively titled Badtameez.

Personal life

Hashmi married Parveen Shahani in an Islamic wedding ceremony on December 2006 after a six and a half year relationship. The couple have a son Ayaan Hashmi who was born on 3 February 2010. On January 15, 2014, Emraan's four-year-old son Ayaan was diagnosed with first-stage cancer.

Filmography

Awards and nominations

See also

	 List of Indian film actors


