
#Article: Marcelo Serrado
#Type: regular article

Marcelo Magalhães Serrado (born February 10, 1967 in Rio de Janeiro) is a Brazilian actor.

Biography

Marcelo began his career at CAL (Casa de Arte das Laranjeiras) in 1985.

TV debut in 1987 on the novel Corpo Santo of TV Manchete.

In 1989, Serrado premiered on TV Globo in Pacto de Sangue. 

In 2005, after 15 years doing soap operas on TV Globo, Serrado decided not to renew his contract with the station to work on Mandrake Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in the series produced by cable channel HBO Brazil, Raul skin of the police. Soon signed after three years with the Record, where he served in the novels Prova de Amor and Vidas Opostas.

In 2008, after nearly four years of preparation, Serrado premiere the show Tom & Vinícius, o musical. Serrado - creator of the show - want to show the young duo still meeting in 1955 to assemble the play Orfeu da Conceição up since 1965 with international fame. The cast played Tom Jobim is Thelmo Fernandes and Vinicius de Moraes.

Serrado in 2009, joined the cast of the novel Poder Paralelo of Rede Record.

In 2010, the actor was on display with the monologue Não Existe Mulher Difícil. The following year, Serrado appears on the big screen in the feature film Malu de Bicicleta.

He returned to TV Globo in 2011 and is currently playing Crô, a homosexual and that Butler is the sidekick of the villain played by Tereza Cristina (Christiane Torloni) soap opera in nine of Fina Estampa.

In 2012, will be cast in the remake of the telenovela Gabriela. In November of the same year, it was announced by columnist Regina Rito, the newspaper O Dia, that Serrado will play the character Crô of Fina Estampa again, but now in a feature film. The script of Super Crô - O Filme is being written by Aguinaldo Silva together with Rodrigo Ribeiro and Maurício Gyboski. The direction will be for the account of Bruno Barreto. Forecasts are to be released in July 2013.

Personal life

He was married to actress Christine Fernandes from 1994 to 1999. The actor has a daughter named Catarina, who was from his ex-wife, actress Rafaela Mandelli. On August 4, 2012, Serrado married the dancer Roberta Fernandes, on April 9, 2013, the twins were born the couple, who have been given names of Felipe and Guilherme.

Filmography

Television

Film


