
#Article: Grant Haskin
#Type: regular article

Grant Haskin (born 1968) is the former Executive Deputy Mayor of Cape Town, where he also served briefly as acting Mayor City of Cape Town, South Africa.

Biography

Early life and education

Grant was born in Camps Bay, a suburb on Cape Towns Atlantic coast. The family moved to Wynberg in Cape Town's Southern suburbs and he was enrolled at Wynberg Boys Junior School. A few years later, the family moved to Constantia but he continued with his schooling at Wynberg Boys High School, matriculating there in 1986. He spent the nest two years doing compulsory national service in the South African Defence Force.

Career

Grant became a member of the ACDP in late 1998 at the age of 30. He was a volunteer at the party's provincial office, where he served as a general office assistant, tea maker, photo-copier, toilet cleaner and campaign assistant until the 2 June 1999 National General Elections. A month later, at the party's provincial annual general conference, he was elected to serve as Provincial Secretary General, a post he was re-elected to until 2005 when he became the Provincial Chairman. In December 2000, he was elected to the City of Cape Town as a councillor via the ACDP's proportional representation list, where he was also elected as caucus leader of the seven ACDP councillors. As a result of the 2004 National General Elections, Grant was elected to the Western Cape Provincial Parliament as MPP. In March 2007, the ACDP redeployed him from MPP to Councillor in the City of Cape Town to take up the ACDP's seat on the Mayoral Committee as political head of Amenities and Sport in the City of Cape Town. After the controversial 'walk-over window period' in September 2007 and the protracted negotiation process with the DA on the ACDP's claim to regain the Executive Deputy Mayors seat, he was elected Executive Deputy Mayor of Cape Town. He served as acting Executive Mayor of Cape Town for a brief period after Helen Zille, leader of the Democratic Alliance, who was Executive Mayor of Cape Town, was elected Premier-elect of the Western Cape.

His term as Executive Deputy Mayor ended suddenly on 27 May 2009 when the Democratic Alliance broke its contractual agreement with the ACDP and claimed the post for themselves on the grounds that they 'could be as effective as possible, politically'. Even though the DA also blamed the ACDP for 'breaches of trust', these allegations were refuted.  The ACDP walked away from the governing agreements it had with the DA across the Western Cape Province.  During his term as Executive Deputy Mayor of Cape Town, he was political head of the City's policies and programmes on, inter alia, substance abuse, street people, orphans and vulnerable children (OVC) and international relations.

During the subsequent term as caucus leader for the ACDP, he completed his B.Admin Honours degree in International Relations (Political Science) at the University of the Western Cape (UWC) and is writing his full Masters thesis. As a result of the 18 May 2011 Local Government Elections he was re-elected councillor for the City of Cape Town where he remains the Caucus leader. He has been elected the Provincial Leader for the Western Cape Province of the ACDP.


