
#Article: John Cho
#Type: regular article

John Yohan Cho (born June 16, 1972) is a South Korean born American actor and musician. He starred as Harold Lee in the Harold & Kumar films and played the character John, MILF Guy No. 2 who popularized the term "MILF" in the American Pie films. He also starred in the critically acclaimed Asian American films Better Luck Tomorrow and Yellow.

Cho has portrayed the Star Trek character Hikaru Sulu in the Star Trek reboot film series, has starred in the Total Recall remake and the comedy Identity Thief. On television, he played FBI agent Demetri Noh in the sci-fi television drama FlashForward, as Chau Presley on the sitcom Off Centre and his recurring role as Andy Brooks in the horror drama Sleepy Hollow. He played Henry Higgs on the sitcom Selfie, co-starring Karen Gillan where he became the first Asian-American romantic male lead on American television.

Early life

Cho was born in Seoul, South Korea, and moved to the United States in 1978. He was raised in Los Angeles, where his family settled after living in Houston, Seattle, Daly City, California, and the Monterey Park, California. His father was a minister in the Church of Christ, and was originally from North Korea. Cho graduated from Herbert Hoover High School, in Glendale, California, in 1990. He then attended the University of California, Berkeley, graduating in 1996 with a BA degree in English, and taught English at Pacific Hills School in West Hollywood, California while working at East West Players's theater in downtown Los Angeles.

Acting career

Cho began his career after graduating from Berkeley, when he moved to Los Angeles and worked with the Asian American theatre company East West Players. There, he appeared in Edward Sakamoto's The Taste of Kona Coffee in 1996, and in Euijoon Kim's movie My Tired Broke Ass Pontificating Slapstick Funk in 2000. He gained attention with a small role as "MILF Guy #2" in the 1999 comedy American Pie, in which he popularized the slang term "MILF".  Cho reprised the role in three sequels: American Pie 2, American Wedding, and in the latest installment American Reunion in which he has a much larger role. The character initially had no name but he was given the name "John" in the third film, named after Cho himself.

He had a successful starring role as Harold Lee in 2004's Harold & Kumar Go to White Castle and reprised the role in 2008's Harold & Kumar Escape from Guantanamo Bay, which raked in $38 million at the theaters,  and again in 2011's A Very Harold & Kumar 3D Christmas which made $35 million. Cho's role in the popular franchise was written specifically for him by Hayden Schlossberg, and Cho has recounted that when Schlossberg first approached him with the role, he was initially suspicious.

Cho guest-starred on Charmed as a ghost in 1998 and was one of the stars of the short-lived situation comedy Off Centre in 2001 - 2002. He was a costar of the now-defunct Fox sitcom Kitchen Confidential based on Anthony Bourdain's best-selling book. He had supporting roles in Evolution, a sci-fi comedy directed by Ivan Reitman, and Down to Earth, starring Chris Rock and a minor role in Bowfinger.

In 2002, he had a starring role in the ensemble cast of Justin Lin's Better Luck Tomorrow, a drama focusing on the travails of a group of Asian Americans living in Southern California who are academically successful but socially discontented, and as a result engage in wantonly violent, criminal behavior. It was well received by critics, with the New York Times's Elvis Mitchell describing Cho's character's "lazy magnetism of which he is charmingly aware."  Later that year, the movie Big Fat Liar was released, in which Cho played a Hong Kong-based movie director. He refused to do the accent scripted for his character. The director worked with him to re-develop the role.

Cho appeared on July 2004 issue of KoreAm Journal and in September 2006 was cast in NBC's new comedy The Singles Table, but the series never aired due to changes in scheduling and production. In 2006 and again in 2009, Cho was selected as one of the sexiest men alive in People Magazine.

In 2007, Cho was added to the cast of Ugly Betty as a recurring character. Cho plays Kenny, a best friend of accountant Henry Grubstick (played by Christopher Gorham). Cho played helmsman Hikaru Sulu in J. J. Abrams's feature film Star Trek. Manohla Dargis of The New York Times praised him, along with Anton Yelchin, Chris Pine, and Zachary Quinto, for making their roles "ultimately and rather wonderfully their own".

Cho appeared in Nas' "Be a Nigger Too" music video along with various celebrities, and had a guest appearance on the sitcom How I Met Your Mother, in the episode "I'm Not That Guy" where he played a partner in an evil law firm. Of the latter, Staci Krause of IGN, wrote that Cho was "the scene stealer in this episode" and that she would "definitely like to see more of him" in the series.

From 2009 to 2010, Cho starred in the television series FlashForward as FBI Special Agent Demetri Noh. His character was originally slated to be killed off during what turned out to be the show's only season, but after his turn as Sulu in Star Trek boosted his popularity, the producers revised the show's storyline so that he survived, in an attempt to boost declining ratings.

He starred as Henry Higgs in the short-lived sitcom Selfie, a re-tooling of the play Pygmalion by George Bernard Shaw.  In the role, he became the first Asian American romantic male lead on American television.

Musical career

He is the lead singer for Viva La Union (formerly known as Left of Zed), a Los Angeles garage rock band composed of former UCB and USC students. They have one album, self-titled, while their song "Chinese Baby" is featured on the Harold & Kumar Escape from Guantanamo Bay soundtrack.

Personal life

Cho married actress Kerri Higuchi in 2006 and have a son, born in 2008, and a daughter, born in 2013. They currently reside in Los Angeles, California. He supported the 2012 re-election campaign of Democratic U.S President Barack Obama.  Though his character in Harold & Kumar is so associated in smoking marijuana, he has indicated that he does not partake in the use of the drug.  In an interview with Glamour Magazine, he states that he is a big proponent of having a therapist because of his wife who has influenced him to have one. The thing that he owns the most is shoes, and he likes to "wear Birkenstocks around all day." His hobbies include playing and listening to music and reading fiction, but his favorite thing to do was go on long walks with his dogs when he had them because it was the best thing for his head and soul. He is very cautious of social media because he doesn't want to get addicted to it. His favorite vacation spot is Hawaii. His bucket list includes to do Shakespeare, an action movie, and do a movie in New York sometime.  He is acquainted with other fellow Korean actors, such as Daniel Dae Kim, Sandra Oh, and his "hero" Margaret Cho.  

Being an Asian American in Hollywood

Cho indicates that he has found freedom in being Harold in the film because the character is against the grain of an Asian American in that of being an Asian American stoner. According to the Washington Post, Cho states that he has experienced racism while being Hollywood and that he takes roles and tries to take roles that don't fall in the views of Asian stereotypes. In an interview, he exclaims that he is "attracted to things that Asian Americans haven't done in film." When asked to do an Asian accent for "Big Fat Liar", he refused. “I don’t want to do this role in a kid’s comedy, with an accent, because I don’t want young people laughing at an accent inadvertently,” he wrote. In a tweet on March 24, 2015 he said, "Stop turning Asian roles white. It's bullshit and we all know it." On being the first Asian to do a romantic lead, he described it as being "revolutionary" and a "personal revolution" for him because of its uniqueness in Hollywood  and the inability of him getting offered such roles.  He also states, "There's a reason we still have to call it "colorblind casting" instead of just casting."  

Filmography

Film

Television

Web series

Video games

See also


