
#Article: Hanna Rosin
#Type: regular article

Hanna Rosin (born 1970) is an American author and writer. She is co-founder of DoubleX, a women's site connected to the online magazine Slate. 

Rosin writes for The Atlantic, and has written for the Washington Post, The New Yorker, GQ, New York and The New Republic. She is the author of God's Harvard (2007) and The End of Men: And the Rise of Women (2012).

Personal life

Rosin was born to a Jewish family in Israel and grew up in Queens, where her father was a taxi driver  She graduated from Stuyvesant High School in 1987, where she won a number of competitions on the debate team with her partner David Coleman.  She attended Stanford University, and is married to Atlas Obscura CEO David Plotz; they live in Washington, D.C. with their three children.

Career

Rosin is a co-founder of Slate magazine's DoubleX, a women's site. She is also a writer for The Atlantic. She has written for The Washington Post, The New Yorker, GQ and New York after beginning her career as a staff writer for The New Republic. Rosin has also appeared on The Daily Show and The Colbert Report on Comedy Central.

A character portrayed by actress Chloë Sevigny in the 2003 film Shattered Glass about Rosin's colleague at The New Republic, Stephen Glass, was loosely based on Rosin.

Rosin has published a book based on her 2010 Atlantic story, The End of Men. She gave a TED talk on the subject in 2010. In this work she details the emergence of women as a powerful force of the American workplace. For Rosin, this shifting economy has allowed women to use their most gendered stereotypical strengths to succeed.

In the past she has specialized in writing about religious-political issues, in particular the influence of evangelical Christians on the 2004 U.S. presidential campaign. She is the author of God's Harvard: A Christian College on a Mission to Save America, published in September 2007. Based on a New Yorker story, the book follows several young Christians at Patrick Henry College, a new evangelical institution that teaches its students to "shape the culture and take back the nation." 

In 2009, she published a controversial article in The Atlantic entitled "The Case Against Breast-Feeding," questioning whether current social pressures in favor of breastfeeding were appropriate, and whether the science in support of the practice was conclusive. In 2009 she was nominated for a National Magazine Award for "Boy's Life", a story about a young transgender girl. In 2010 she won the award for her contribution to a package of stories in New York magazine about circumcision. Her stories have also been included in anthologies of Best American Magazine Writing 2009 and Best American Crime Reporting 2009.

On February 27, 2012, following the death of children's author Jan Berenstain, Rosin wrote an article critical of the Berenstain Bears series of books and said "good riddance" to the beloved children's author. After negative public reaction to her use of the phrase "good riddance," Rosin issued an apology.

Writings

	 God's Harvard: A Christian College on a Mission to Save America. Orlando: Harcourt, 2007. ISBN 978-0-15-101262-6 

	 The End of Men: And the Rise of Women. New York, New York: Riverhead Books, 2012. ISBN 978-1-59448-804-7


