
#Article: Colm Meaney
#Type: regular article

Colm J. Meaney (; Irish: Colm Ó Maonaigh; born 30 May 1953) is an Irish actor widely known for playing Miles O'Brien in Star Trek: The Next Generation and Star Trek: Deep Space Nine. He is second only to Michael Dorn in most appearances in Star Trek episodes. He has guest-starred on many TV shows from Law & Order to The Simpsons, and currently stars as railroad magnate Thomas Durant on AMC's drama series Hell on Wheels.

He has also had a significant career in motion pictures, appearing in the film The Damned United; all three film adaptations of Roddy Doyle's The Barrytown Trilogy; Get Him to the Greek and Alan Partridge: Alpha Papa.

Early life

Meaney was born in Dublin. He began studying acting when he was 14 years old, and entered the Abbey Theatre School of Acting after secondary school. He became a member of the Irish National Theatre and worked for the next eight years in England, touring with several theatre companies.

Career

Meaney's first television appearance was in Z-Cars on BBC 1 in 1978. He guest-starred on shows such as Remington Steele and Moonlighting before embarking on a successful film career; he received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actor for his role in The Snapper.

Meaney first appeared on Star Trek: The Next Generation in its 1987 pilot episode, "Encounter at Farpoint", as an unnamed helm officer. His character became a frequently recurring one, and was given the name of Miles O'Brien as he became more prominent in the crew as Transporter Chief. In 1993, Meaney left The Next Generation for a more prominent regular role in its spin-off Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, and remained on that show until its final episode in 1999. With 225 total appearances on Star Trek, he has made more appearances on the franchise than any other actor except Michael Dorn.

Meaney played Colum O'Hara in the 1994 miniseries Scarlett, the sequel to Gone With the Wind.He has played a minor recurring role as Cowen, leader of the Genii on the Sci-Fi Channel (now Syfy) series Stargate Atlantis, guest-starred on Law & Order, Law & Order: Criminal Intent and appeared as Bob O'Donnell on the ABC show Men in Trees.

He was the only actor to appear in all three film adaptations of Roddy Doyle's The Barrytown Trilogy, wherein he played the father of the Rabbitte family. Due to rights issues, the family name was changed from film to film.His stage appearances include the Old Vic production of Eugene O'Neill's A Moon for the Misbegotten.Meaney starred in British comedy film Three and Out released in the UK on 25 April 2008. In July of the same year An Post (Irish mail agency) issued a postage stamp showing Meaney as Joe Mullen in the film Kings.

In 2009 Meaney co-starred with Gerard Butler and Jamie Foxx in Law Abiding Citizen wherein he played Detective Dunnigan.In March 2009, Meaney guest-starred as an Irish bartender on the St. Patrick's Day episode of The Simpsons, "In the Name of the Grandfather". In the same month the film The Damned United was released, chronicling the 44-day period in which Brian Clough was manager of Leeds United. Meaney played the former Leeds manager Don Revie.He also co-starred in Soldiers of Fortune with Christian Slater and Ving Rhames. In 2013, Meaney co-starred with Steve Coogan in Alan Partridge: Alpha Papa. In 2014, he appeared as The Horse in the BBC's three-part crime story, The Driver.

Personal life

Meaney's first marriage in 1977 was to Irish actress Bairbre Dowling, with whom he had a daughter, Brenda, in 1984. They divorced in 1994. He married a second time in March 2007 to French costume designer, Ines Glorian, with whom he had a daughter, Ada, in 2005.

He supported Sinn Féin candidate Martin McGuinness during the 2011 Irish Presidential Election.

Filmography

See also


