
#Article: Brian Austin Green
#Type: regular article

Brian Austin Green (born Brian Green; July 15, 1973) is an American actor and rapper best known for his portrayal of David Silver on the television series Beverly Hills, 90210 (1990-2000). Green has also had series regular roles in Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles (as Derek Reese), Freddie, Wedding Band, and Anger Management, as well as guest starring roles on Smallville (as Metallo) and Desperate Housewives, playing the love interest of Bree Van de Kamp. Green married actress Megan Fox in 2010, but she announced in 2015 that she was filing for divorce.

Early life

Green was born in Van Nuys, Los Angeles, California, the son of Joyce and George Green, who was a country and western musician. His middle name, "Austin" was added to differentiate himself from another actor when he joined the Screen Actor's Guild as a child. Green grew up in North Hollywood, Los Angeles, California, and attended North Hollywood High School, after attending the Hamilton High School Academy of Music.

Career

Prior to his role on Beverly Hills, 90210, Green had a recurring role for three seasons (1986-89) on the hit CBS prime-time soap opera Knots Landing, playing the role of Brian Cunningham, the son of Abby Cunningham Ewing (Donna Mills). He reprised his role in the television miniseries Knots Landing: Back to the Cul-de-Sac (1997).

Producer Aaron Spelling has stated that Green was cast in the role of David Silver much because he felt that Greens own personality resembled the personality they wanted that character to have. The character was often scripted to reflect Greens own interests. As the series progressed, the character began to experiment with hip hop music and DJing, as did Green himself.In 1996, Green dropped "Austin" from his professional name and attempted a career as a rapper, releasing one album, titled One Stop Carnival, produced by The Pharcyde member Slimkid3. In the 1990s, he was a guest star on Growing Pains, Parker Lewis Cant Lose, Melrose Place, Saved by the Bell: The College Years, Fantastic Four, MADtv, Biker Mice from Mars, Malibu Shores, Sabrina, the Teenage Witch and Knots Landing: Back to the Cul-de-Sac.

Green appeared briefly in the multiple award-winning Showtime drama series Resurrection Blvd. as Luke Bonner (2001-04), a police officer attending law school. He had a cameo on Hope & Faith where he met Megan Fox; they started dating in 2004. He appeared on the ABC sitcom Freddie (2005) starring Freddie Prinze, Jr. He was a guest star on The Twilight Zone, Las Vegas and CSI: Crime Scene Investigation. He also appeared alongside former 90210 cast member Ian Ziering in the Tony Scott film Domino as parodies of themselves.Green appeared in a horror short called Grace, which was set around a miscarriage gone bad, and features Gilmore Girls actress Liza Weil as his love interest. It premiered at the Fangoria Weekend of Horrors on June 2, 2006, and was reworked as a full-length feature film (2009). He was a guest star on George Lopez as Chris in 2006.

In 2008, Green was cast as Derek Reese in Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles, a Resistance fighter sent to the past by the future John Connor. He is the older brother of Kyle Reese (John Connors father) and paternal uncle of John. Green was a recurring character in Season 1 but became a regular at the start of Season 2, following a positive response from critics and fans. His character is killed by a Terminator in the penultimate episode, but another Derek from an alternate timeline is introduced in the series finale and would have remained on the show if it had been renewed for a third season.

Green guest-starred on the Season 7 finale of CSI: Miami as Anthony Green. Green has also been cast in The CWs new drama pilot Body Politic, along with Minka Kelly, Gabrielle Union, and Jason Dohring. The series was not been picked up for fall 2009. Green said in an interview that he was co-producing a big screen adaptation of Fathom, starring Megan Fox. On September 27, 2009, Green made a guest appearance on the television series Saturday Night Live in a skit involving girlfriend (now wife) Megan Fox. In the skit Green played a version of the Transformer Bumblebee in which Bumblebee is merely a man wearing a Bumblebee mask. Green was cast as Clay in One Tree Hills seventh season. Green then left the cast because of scheduling conflicts and the role was then given to Robert Buckley and he starred as superhero Callan in the Patrick Durham-directed movie Cross, which was released to DVD and download in May 2011.

In 2009, Green was cast as John Corben/Metallo in Smallville. He appeared in three episodes in the ninth season between 2009-2010, the first being the ninth season premiere episode "Savior". The character is a war-time reporter, similar to the Silver Age John Corben. As a back-story for this version, he had been recently stationed in Afghanistan. When he meets Lois Lane, he expresses his distaste for vigilantes, particularly "the Blur" (Clark Kent). Corben is "reactivated" in the episode "Upgrade" after Tess scientists are able to correct the initial design flaw in the Kryptonite heart that causes an adrenal overload and resulting psychosis. He reappears in the finale season episode "Prophecy" as a member of Marionette Ventures, with Supergirl assigned as his target. In 2010, Green appeared in a multi-episode story arc on the ABC series Desperate Housewives. He plays Keith Watson, Brees contractor and lover for the first part of the season,

In 2012, Green had a guest appearance in the sitcom Anger Management playing Sean, the boyfriend of Charlies ex-wife, Jen in the first episode of the show. This episode broke a ratings record with 5.74 million viewers on its series debut night and ranks as the most-watched sitcom premiere in cable history. He returned to the show in the episode "Charlie Breaks Up With Kate" when Jen gets back with Sean. In June 2013, Green was promoted to series regular.

Green was a guest-star in the episode finale of second season Happy Endings. He played Chris, who meets dateless Penny via Skype. He returned in the first episode of the third season "Cazsh Dummy Spillionaires". In the same year, Green starred in the a new television series, Wedding Band, about a group of friends who perform at weddings. In the TBS comedy, Green plays Tommy, the frontman for Mother of the Bride, a group of four buddies who arent ready to give up the dream of being rock stars. On January 22, 2013, TBS officially cancelled the series after one season because of low ratings.

Personal life

Green won the celebrity portion of the Grand Prix of Long Beach in early 2010.

Relationships and family

Green dated his Beverly Hills, 90210 co-star Tiffani Thiessen in the early and mid-1990s. Green and his former Beverly Hills, 90210 cast-mate Vanessa Marcil have a son, Kassius.

Green subsequently began dating actress Megan Fox in 2004, having first met on the set of Hope & Faith when he was 30 years old and she was 18. In 2006, they became engaged, and then broke off their engagement in February 2009. Some time later in 2009, Fox was targeted by a group of fashion-motivated criminals known as "The Bling Ring", who robbed Green's home because she was living with him. Green and Fox announced they were engaged again in June 2010, and several days later, on June 24, 2010, the two wed in a private ceremony at the Four Seasons Resort on Maui. They have two sons: Noah Shannon Green (born September 27, 2012) and Bodhi Ransom Green (born February 12, 2014). Fox filed for divorce from Green on August 21, 2015, a few days after the couple announced their separation.

Legal issues

Brian Austin Green has criticized the paparazzi for the invasion of his private life with then-girlfriend Megan Fox, whom he married in 2010. Green said, "Megan and I so despise the paparazzi. We value our private life and our time at home. The last thing I want is to be ducking in and out of places because I'm worried about my picture being taken, especially when I'm with my son. When they follow me in cars when I pick him up from school, that's really crossing the line. I understand that they want shots of me with Megan, but we're pretty boring. They won't catch us out at clubs, getting drunk or being hauled in for DUIs. All they usually get is pictures of us leaving Staples or Target, or walking into a restaurant."

On September 17, 2010, Green stated, "It wasn't so much of a problem before Megan, but once Transformers hit, that was it. I had never experienced paparazzi on that level, because during 90210, they were still developing pictures and selling them by hand. It was a whole different experience. I hated being famous during 90210. I'm not an extrovert. I'm 37. I have a beautiful wife. I have an amazing 8-year-old son. I love acting, but this is just my job."

In March 2012, photographer Delbert Shaw filed a lawsuit against Green and Fox in Los Angeles County Superior Court for allegedly assaulting him after taking photographs of the couple while on vacation in Hawaii in 2010. In June 2012, Green claimed he was simply defending himself against Shaw and that his wife should not be included in the lawsuit.

Filmography

Web series

Discography

	 One Stop Carnival (1996)

	 Esthero: Wikked Lil Grrrls (2005) (drums)


