
#Article: Ian Greenberg
#Type: regular article

Ian Greenberg (born June 15, 1942) is the co-founder of Astral Media, Inc. and has been its President and Chief Executive Officer since 1996. 

Biography

Ian Greenberg is a graduate of Harvard Business School's Advanced Management program (which is an intensive course that the student pays to enter). 0Harold Greenberg and his three brothers, Harvey Greenberg, Sidney Greenberg and Ian Greenberg, founded Astral Media, Inc. in 1961. After Harold's death, Ian Greenberg assumed control of the company and gradually transformed the company, which began as a photographic specialty business, into a pure-play media company (in the 1990s), focused on television, radio, out-of-home advertising and digital media properties.

Astral Media had over 2,800 employees in eight Canadian provinces. Under Greenberg’s direction, Astral Media had grown to operate 84 radio stations, 24 pay and specialty television channels and over 9,500 out-of-home advertising faces. The company also operated over 100 websites. 

Since he was assumed the position of President and CEO, the company has recorded 15 consecutive years of growth.

On March 16, 2012, Astral Media announced it had signed an agreement to sell the company to BCE, Inc (Bell Canada). On October 18, 2012 the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) denied BCE's bid to acquire Astral. 

Culture

He is very involved in his community and actively supports Canadian culture as well as a large number of charitable associations. He and his brothers were awarded the Eleanor Roosevelt Humanities Award for their exceptional contributions to philanthropic endeavours in 1993

Ian Greenberg is a member of the Canadian Council of Chief Executives and a governor of the Sir Mortimer B. Davis Jewish General Hospital in Montreal. He is a member of the board of directors of Cineplex Entertainment.

Marriage, children and family

Mr. Greenberg lives in Montreal with his wife Linda. They have three children and nine grandchildren. He has many nieces and nephews.

Upon the founding of Astral, Harold Greenberg and his three brothers, including Ian, split a set of what has come to be known as "special shares" amongst themselves and subsequently their respective families (held by special holdings in each of their families names). These shares played a part in the 2012 denied takeover bid by Bell Media. http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/why-the-bce-deal-is-still-ian-greenbergs-best-option/article4898511/.

Awards

	1993: Eleanor Roosevelt Humanities Award, co-awarded with his brothers

	2007: Ted Rogers and Velma Rogers Graham Award

	2008: Inducted in the Canadian Association of Broadcasters' Hall of Fame

	2013: Inducted in the Canadian Business Hall of Fame

	2013: Academy Special Award, for exceptional achievement in Canadian film and TV

	May 8, 2014: Inducted into the Canadian Broadcast Industry Hall of Fame


