
#Article: Jason Momoa
#Type: regular article

Joseph Jason Namakaeha Momoa (born August 1, 1979), better known as Jason Momoa, is an American actor, model, director, writer, and producer. He is known for his television roles as Ronon Dex (2005-2009) on the military science fiction television series Stargate Atlantis (2004-2009); as Khal Drogo in the HBO fantasy television series Game of Thrones (2011-2012); and as Phillip Kopus on the SundanceTV drama series The Red Road (2014-2015).

Momoa portrayed the title character in the sword and sorcery film Conan the Barbarian (2011). He will appear in the 2016 superhero film Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice as Aquaman, with a solo film for the character following in 2018.

Road to Paloma, his first film as director, writer, and producer, and in which he also stars in the lead role, was released in July 11, 2014.

Early life

An only child, Momoa was born in Honolulu, Hawaii, the son of Coni, a photographer, and Joseph Momoa, a painter. He was raised in Norwalk, Iowa, by his mother. His father is of Native Hawaiian descent, while his mother is of German, Irish, and Native American ancestry. After high school, Jason began college in Iowa as a marine biology major, studying for a period in the Florida Keys. He then transferred his major to wildlife biology at Colorado State University, before moving to the Hawaiian Islands to reconnect with his father.

Momoa traveled extensively, took up pastel painting in Paris, and studied Buddhist teachings in Tibet.

Career

In 1998, Momoa was discovered by international designer Takeo Kobayashi, which launched his modeling career. He won Hawaii's Model of the Year 1999 and hosted the Miss Teen Hawaii contest. At 19 years old, he also worked part-time in a surf shop before being cast in Baywatch Hawaii. To get that role, he lied about his modeling experience on his resume, claiming Louis Vuitton and Gucci as past work. Momoa appeared as Jason Ioane in the action drama series Baywatch Hawaii (1999 - 2001). In addition to his appearances in North Shore (2004-2005), Johnson Family Vacation (2004) and Stargate: Atlantis (2005-2009), Momoa was cast as Roman in four episodes of the comedy-drama television series The Game (2009). He then portrayed the title protagonist in Conan the Barbarian (2011), a reimagining of the 1982 film of the same name and a role made famous by Arnold Schwarzenegger. Momoa gained his role of Khal Drogo on HBO's Game Of Thrones through his audition in which he performed the Haka, an intimidating Māori war dance traditionally used on the battlefield.

After the shooting of Stargate Atlantis Season 4 was over, Momoa had his dreadlocks cut off. Their weight had been giving him headaches, and even whiplash when filming action scenes. The program agreed with the decision and had planned to film a scene where Ronon cuts off his hair for Season 5's "Broken Ties", but that change was ultimately overruled by the Sci Fi network. On the first day of filming for Season 5, his dreadlocks were reattached, but the process was too taxing, forcing Momoa to switch to using his stunt double's wig until a custom wig could be made and delivered two weeks later. Coincidentally, when he was first cast for the role, the producers asked him to cut off the dreadlocks, but they became a trademark of his character, so the producers allowed Momoa to keep them.

Road to Paloma is an American drama thriller film directed by Momoa, co-written with Jonathan Hirschbein and Robert Homer Mollohan. The film stars Momoa, Sarah Shahi, Lisa Bonet, Michael Raymond-James and Wes Studi.  It premiéred at the 2014 Sarasota Film Festival in April 2014. The film had a limited theatrical release on July 15, 2014, in New York City and Los Angeles and a VOD release.

In March 2014, Momoa joined the dark comedy/thriller indie Sugar Mountain alongside Cary Elwes and Haley Webb, which had its principal photography done in Alaska.

In June 2014, it was reported that Momoa had been cast in the role of Aquaman in the upcoming superhero film Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. Momoa's role as Aquaman was confirmed on October 2014. This will mark Aquaman's live action theatrical debut. He will also be starring in an Aquaman solo film in 2018. In February 2015, the first look at Momoa as Aquaman was released online and Momoa said he "freaked out" and called the experience of seeing it "amazing."  He also portrayed Connor in the Canadian horror action film Wolves.

Momoa starred in the 2014 sci-fi horror movie, Debug, which is scheduled to be released in the United Kingdom in November 2014 and which was written and directed by Momoa's former Stargate Atlantis co-star, British-born Canadian actor David Hewlett. In February 2015, it was announced that he will portray a Cannibal in the drama thriller film The Bad Batch, and Arthur Curry / Aquaman in Zack Snyder's Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. He will star in an action movie titled Braven. 

Personal life

He met actress Lisa Bonet in 2005 after mutual friends introduced them. Bonet gave birth to their daughter, Lola Iolani Momoa, on July 23, 2007, and they married November 15, 2007. Bonet and Momoa had a son, Nakoa-Wolf Manakauapo Namakaeha Momoa, on December 15, 2008. The birth was first announced by Momoa's mother on the fan forums of his official site. She said that Nakoa means "warrior" (although the true meaning of the word nakoa is "brave") and Mana stands for “strength/spirit,” while Kaua ("rain") and Po ("dark") pertain to the circumstances surrounding his birthday (he was born on a rare bad-weather night in Los Angeles). He shares his other middle name, Namakaeha, with his father. In a recent interview with Katie Couric, Momoa confessed to having a boyhood crush on Bonet from her role as Denise Huxtable on The Cosby Show.

On November 15, 2008, Momoa was slashed in the face with a broken beer glass at the Birds Cafe, a Hollywood, California, tavern.  He received around 140 stitches during reconstructive surgery, and the scar is apparent in his later work.

Filmography

Film

Television

See also

	 List of Americans of Irish descent

	 List of German Americans

	 List of Native Americans of the United States

	 List of Native Hawaiians

	 List of people from Hawaii

	 List of people from Iowa


