
#Article: Jean-Paul Lanfranchi
#Type: regular article

Jean Paul Lanfranchi is a French lawyer and businessman.

He is one of the best-known French entrepreneurs of the business development in Africa.

An African Childhood

Jean Paul Lanfranchi has lived an African childhood until the age of 11 years to the day school at St. Paul Abidjan in Côte d'Ivoire in Marist Brothers. He learned the languages of the countries of Black Africa: the Lingala, the kigwandi, the Tshiluba and Dioula.

Back in France, he continued his studies at the Stanislas College and the Law University of Paris control until then at the Institute of Higher International Studies at Panthéon-Assas University.

1977 - 1980: The start of a unique legal career

Jean Paul Lanfranchi begins Attorney career in 1977 in Kinshasa in Democratic Republic of Congo.

27 years old, he has been the first French lawyer practicing in Kinshasa and became the advisor of the Embassy of France in Democratic Republic of Congo until 1980.

1980 - 1997: Mobutu years

Jean Paul Lanfranchi will be the friend of the family of President Mobutu Sese Seko and his personal advisor from 1980 until his death.

Moreover, he became consultant for major French corporations based in Black Africa as Accor, Dumez, Castel Frères, EMS, Northern France, Air France - UTA ...He also organized the privatization of the sugar sector of the Ivory Coast of Gabon and Central African Republic.

1997 - 2001: Bongo Years

Jean Paul Lanfranchi will help the restructuration of many state enterprises to the Omar Bongo, second president of the  Gabonese Republic.

He managed the rescue of Sugar Company of Upper Ogoouénotemment (SOSUHO) to Franceville, capital of Haut-Ogooué province of birth of the President.He works closely with Patrice Otha, Chapter President of Gabon Initiative Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) and new Chief of Staff for Ali Bongo since January 2010.

2001 - 2005: Castel Years

Jean Paul Lanfranchi is in Castel Group advisor to President Pierre Castel., the son of Spanish worker born in 1928.

He restructures activities breweries and bottling operations in Africa and Eastern Europe.

He managed to regain ownership of breweries in Eastern Europe who had been robbed at Castel Group.

Since 2006: The years of business entrepreneur

Jean Paul Lanfranchi founded in January 2006 BIH Eastern society that includes all the activities of the breweries and bottling Castel Group in Georgia, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Uzbekistan and Kurdistan.

He became Chairman, CEO and shareholder with CVCI (Citi Venture Capital International - the emerging markets private equity arm of Citigroup).

He is recognized as an expert on economic development in this area and has consulted on numerous occasions to share her experience:

- Symposium on French Senate on the Caucasus

- Participation in the first Eurasia Forum

- Seminar for French Agency for international business development Ubifrance in Central Asia

- Symposium on Tbilisi, Chamber of Commerce and Industry - French Georgian

Passionate about wine, he launched into Jalilabad south of Azerbaijan plans for a winery about an innovative modern winery with 300 hectares planted with Bordeaux varietals.

Once this project is completed with excellence and harvesting after 2, he sold the company "French wineyards" local actors.

See also


