
#Article: Jeanne Cagney
#Type: regular article

Jeanne Carolyn Cagney (March 25, 1919  -  December 7, 1984) was an American film and television actress.

Early years

Born in New York City, Cagney and her four older brothers were raised by her widowed mother. Two of the brothers were film actor James Cagney and actor/producer William Cagney. She attended Hunter College High School. Majoring in French and German, she was a cum laude graduate of Hunter College of City College of New York and a member of Phi Beta Kappa Society. She also starred in plays produced by the college's dramatic society. Following her college graduation, she studied acting at the Pasadena Playhouse.

Stage

Cagney was one of the stars of the original production of The Iceman Cometh on Broadway.

Film

After being heard by a scout while appearing on Bing Crosby's radio program, Cagney had a film test with RKO Pictures. However, she signed a long-term contract with Paramount Pictures. She appeared in 19 films between 1939 and 1965, including four films with James Cagney: Yankee Doodle Dandy (1942), The Time of Your Life (1948), A Lion Is in the Streets (1953) and Man of a Thousand Faces (1957). Cagney gave a noted performance opposite Mickey Rooney in Quicksand (1950). In 1946 Eugene O'Neill cast her as Maggie in his play "The Iceman Cometh."

Radio

Most of Cagney's appearances on radio were as a guest in dramatic programs as noted below. She briefly played the title role in the soap opera The Romance of Helen Trent.

Television

In addition, she also served as the fashion commentator of Queen for a Day, hosted by Jack Bailey on NBC and ABC from 1956 to 1963. This "game show" is regarded as a forerunner of today's reality shows. Cagney hosted segments providing tips on style and introducing the latest fashions.

In 1954, Cagney made a pilot for a mystery series, Satan's Waiting,, but it apparently was not sold.

Family

Cagney married actor Ross Latimer (also known as Kim Spaulding) in 1944. She was divorced from him March 9, 1951. They had no children. She married Jack Morrison, a faculty member in theater arts at UCLA, on June 6, 1953; they had two daughters, Mary and Terry.

Death

Cagney died in Newport Beach, California from lung cancer, aged 65. Survivors included brothers Bill and James Cagney, daughters Theresa Cagney and Mary Anne Roberts, and a grandson.

Radio appearances


