
#Article: Jim Meskimen
#Type: regular article

James Ross "Jim" Meskimen (born September 10, 1959) is an American stand-up comedian, actor, impressionist, voice artist, and comedian. He is known for his work on Whose Line Is It Anyway?.

Early life

Meskimen was born in Los Angeles, California, the son of Freeman Meskimen and Marion Ross.

Career

Meskimen portrayed the father of Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen's characters in Our Lips Are Sealed. He portrayed Officer Wholihan in How the Grinch Stole Christmas.

He voices Thom Cat, Neighbor John, and Stumpy in the Thom Cat short film on Random! Cartoons. Currently, Meskimen provides the voice of the Genie in the Aladdin franchise (which started with Disney Think Fast in 2008), even before Robin Williams died in 2014. In 2012, Meskimen voices several different characters in Lego The Lord of the Rings. As well, he is the voice of George W. Bush and other politicians for the Jib Jab animated shorts. In the same year, Meskimen voices and motion captures David Patraeus in Call of Duty: Black Ops 2.

Meskimen was a contestant on season eight of America's Got Talent. He has also toured various U.S. cities performing a one-man act, entitled "Jimpressions", of celebrity impersonations and original characters.

Personal life

In 1987, Meskimen married Tamra Meskimen (née Shockley). They have a daughter named Taylor (born 1990). He is a Scientologist.

Filmography

Television

	 Anger Management - Daniel

	 Avatar: The Last Airbender - Lieutenant Jee, General How, Avatar Kuruk

	 Avengers Assemble - Arsenal, Ultron

	 G.I. Joe: Renegades - Norton, additional voices

	 Kung Fu Panda: Legends of Awesomeness - Master Kweng, additional voices

	 Lego Marvel Super Heroes: Avengers Reassembled - Ultron

	 MAD - Gandalf, Droopy, Benedict Arnold, additional voices

	 Phineas and Ferb - Additional voices

	 Random! Cartoons - Thom Cat, Neighbor John, Stumpy ("Thom Cat" short)

	 Rules of Engagement - Mr. Wrigley

	 Shaggy & Scooby-Doo Get a Clue! - Agent 1, Robi

	 Superman: Red Son - Lex Luthor, Perry White, Guy Gardner/Green Lantern, Joseph Stalin, Jor-L

	 Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles - Carlos Chiang O'Brien Gambe

	 The Big Bang Theory - Doctor, Man (voice)

	 The Boondocks - Bill O'Reilly, Chris Hansen, Additional voices

	 The Legend of Korra - Bataar, Daw, Avatar Kuruk, Additional voices

	 The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest - Additional voices

	 ThunderCats - Aburn, Additional voices

	 Time Squad - George W. Bush, George H.W. Bush

	 Two and a Half Men - Gangster #2 (voice)

	 Whose Line Is it Anyway? - Himself

	 The Big Bang Theory - Las Vegas Wedding Chapel Minister, Man

Film

	 Alvin and the Chipmunks Meet Frankenstein - Mr. Yesman

	 Apollo 13 - TELMU White 

	 Batman: Gotham Knight - Lt. James Gordon, Deadshot

	 Batman: The Dark Knight Returns Pt. 1 - General Briggs

	 Batman: The Dark Knight Returns Pt. 2 - President

	 Big Top Scooby-Doo! - Detective, Phil Flaxman

	 Gordy - Bill Clinton (voice)

	 How the Grinch Stole Christmas - Officer Wholihan

	 Justice League: Crisis on Two Earths - Red Archer, Captain Super

	 Justice League: Doom - King

	 Justice League: Gods and Monsters - Victor Fries

	 Justice League: The New Frontier - Slam Bradley

	 Transformers: Dark of the Moon - John F. Kennedy (voice)

	 My Neighbors the Yamadas - Additional voices

	 Our Lips Are Sealed - Rick Parker

Video games

	 Baldur's Gate - Edwin Odesseiron, Jebadoh, Khalid, Thaldorn

	 Baldur's Gate II: Shadows of Amn - Edwin Odesseiron

	 Baldur's Gate II: Throne of Bhaal - Edwin Odesseiron

	 Batman: Arkham City - Officer Tom Miller

	 Batman: Arkham Knight - Additional voices

	 Batman: Arkham Origins - Police Officers, SWAT Officers

	 Call of Duty: Black Ops - John F. Kennedy

	 Call of Duty: Black Ops 2 - David Patraeus

	 Command & Conquer 4: Tiberian Twilight - Various

	 Diablo III - Additional voices

	 Diablo III: Reaper of Souls - Additional voices

	 Disney Infinity 3.0 - Ultron

	 Disney Think Fast - Genie

	 Epic Mickey - Various

	 Epic Mickey 2: The Power of Two - Mad Doctor

	 EverQuest II - Amren Talbot, Banker Izard, Baron Zafimus, Borthen, Commission Deputy Halford, Green Hood Trap Master, Guild Patron Volarian, Morte Winghammer, Naturalist Tummyfill, Overseer Travog, Sergeant-at-Arms Ironcast, Ubani

	 Fantastic 4 - Classic Doctor Doom, additional voices

	 Final Fantasy XIII-2 - Additional voices

	 Hitman: Blood Money - Additional voices

	 Kinect Disneyland Adventures - Genie

	 Kingdom Hearts HD 2.5 Remix - Genie (Re:coded cinematics)

	 Lego Jurassic World - Additional voices

	 Lego The Lord of the Rings - Various

	 Lightning Returns: Final Fantasy XIII - Additional voices

	 Madagascar: The Video Game - Albino Crocodile, Guard, Jogger, Sailor

	 Shark Tale: The Video Game - Lino

	 Skylanders: Trap Team - Additional voices

	 The Lego Movie Videogame - Additional voices

	 The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II - Trolls

	 Ultimate Spider-Man - Additional voices

Internet

	 Jib Jab - George W. Bush


