
#Article: Matthew Goode
#Type: regular article

Matthew William Goode (born 3 April 1978) is an English actor. His films include Chasing Liberty (2004), Match Point (2005), Imagine Me and You (2005), Brideshead Revisited (2008), Watchmen (2009), A Single Man (2009), Leap Year (2010), Stoker (2013) and The Imitation Game (2014). He starred in the CBS legal drama The Good Wife as Finley "Finn" Polmar from 2014 to 2015.

Early life

Goode was born in Exeter, Devon. His father is a geologist and his mother, Jennifer, is a nurse and amateur theatre director. Goode is the youngest of five children with a brother, two half brothers, and a half sister, television presenter Sally Meen, from his mother's previous marriage. He grew up in the village of Clyst St. Mary, near Exeter.

Goode was educated at Exeter School, an independent school in Exeter, Devon, followed by the University of Birmingham and London's Webber Douglas Academy of Dramatic Art.

Career

Goode played Peter Lynley, the brother of Inspector Lynley in the BBC production Inspector Lynley Mysteries: A Suitable Vengeance and co-starred in the TV film Confessions of an Ugly Stepsister, based on the Gregory Maguire novel of the same name and William Shakespeare's play The Tempest. In 2004, Goode made his American film debut opposite Mandy Moore in the romantic comedy Chasing Liberty.

Goode co-starred in Woody Allen's thriller Match Point, opposite Jonathan Rhys Meyers and Scarlett Johansson, Ol Parker's romantic comedy Imagine Me & You, opposite Piper Perabo and Lena Headey, the TV film My Family and Other Animals, opposite Imelda Staunton, the biographical-musical drama Copying Beethoven, opposite Ed Harris and Diane Kruger and Scott Frank's crime drama The Lookout opposite Joseph Gordon-Levitt. He had a whimsical take on Brooke Burgess in the BBC miniseries He Knew He Was Right based upon Anthony Trollope's novel of the same name.

In 2008, Goode starred in the drama film Brideshead Revisited as Charles Ryder, based on Evelyn Waugh's novel of the same name. In 2009, Goode co-starred opposite Malin Akerman in Zack Snyder's superhero film Watchmen as Ozymandias/Adrian Veidt, and co-starred opposite Colin Firth in the drama film A Single Man, based on Christopher Isherwood's novel of the same name. In 2010, he co-starred opposite Amy Adams in the romantic comedy Leap Year.

In 2013, Goode played the lead in the short lived, critically acclaimed BBC Two drama Dancing on the Edge, as magazine columnist Stanley Mitchell. That same year, he co-starred opposite Mia Wasikowska and Nicole Kidman in the psychological thriller film Stoker.

Also in 2013, Goode co-starred as George Wickham opposite Matthew Rhys in the three-part BBC murder mystery miniseries Death Comes to Pemberley, based on P. D. James' novel of the same name, and a spin-off of the 1995 drama miniseries Pride and Prejudice to commemorate the 200th anniversary of the publication of Jane Austen's novel of the same name.

In March 2014, Goode joined the cast of the CBS legal drama The Good Wife during the fifth season replacing Josh Charles, who played Will Gardner as Finley "Finn" Polmar, a State prosecutor. He made his debut in the fifteenth episode titled "Dramatics, Your Honor" in which Will was killed off. That same year, he co-starred in the historical thriller The Imitation Game as Hugh Alexander, a British Second World War cryptanalyst and chess champion.

In 2014, Goode co-starred in the ITV drama Downton Abbeys Season 5 Christmas special titled "A Moorland Holiday" as Henry Talbot.  He returned to Downton Abbey in October 2015 beginning in the fourth episode of the sixth season.

In May 2015, Goode left The Good Wife after the sixth season finale titled "Wanna Partner?".

Personal life

Goode has been in a relationship with Sophie Dymoke since 2007. They have two daughters and a son, Matilda Eve (b. March 2009) and Teddie Eleanor Rose Goode (b. September 2013) and son Ralph (b.August 2015)

Filmography

Awards


