
#Article: John Cullerton
#Type: regular article

John J. Cullerton (born October 28, 1948) is an American politician who is currently a Democratic member of the Illinois Senate, representing the 6th district since his appointment in 1991. He was elected President of the Illinois Senate in 2009.

Early life

Cullerton is a native of Chicago. He received his bachelor's degree in political science from Loyola University of Chicago, where he also earned his law degree. After graduating from law school, Cullerton served as a Chicago Assistant Public Defender. He went on to work at the law firm of Fagel and Haber.

Political career

Illinois House

In 1979, he was elected to the Illinois General Assembly where he served for twelve years as a member of the House of Representatives. He served as Democratic Floor Leader. According to Cullerton's campaign website, he sponsored the most bills and had the most bills passed of all legislators in the 93rd and 94th General Assemblies.

Illinois Senate

After being appointed to fill Dawn Clark Netsch's seat in 1991, Cullerton was elected to the state senate in 1992 where he was appointed Senate Majority Caucus Whip. Cullerton has been recognized for sponsoring more bills than any other legislator and having more signed into law by the governor.

Cullerton was chosen as the senate president by the Senate Democratic Caucus on November 19, 2008 to begin serving in 2009, replacing the retiring Emil Jones.

His first legislative priority as senate president was to pass the first Capital Bill in 10 years, which allocated roughly $31 billion for public works projects and created tens of thousands of jobs in Illinois Public Act 096-0036 http://ilga.gov/legislation/publicacts/fulltext.asp?Name=096-0036. Cullerton led the senate during the impeachment trial, and subsequent removal, of former Governor Rod Blagojevich.

Cullerton served as a delegate to the 2012 Democratic National Convention.

Professional career

Cullerton serves part-time as an Illinois state senator. Fagel Haber merged with Thompson Coburn LLP in 2007, and Cullerton continues as a partner practicing in the areas of government relations, zoning, licensing, real estate tax assessment, and nonprofit law.

Personal life

Cullerton and his wife, Pam, have five children together: Maggie, John III, Garritt, Kyle, Josephine.

Cullerton co-owns a bar and restaurant in Chicago, Tavern on Rush, with Illinois State Senator James DeLeo (D-Chicago) and others.


