
#Article: Colin Hanks
#Type: regular article

Colin Hanks (born Colin Lewes Dillingham; November 24, 1977) is an American actor. He is known for starring in the 2002 film Orange County, as well as television roles including Alex Whitman in Roswell, Henry Jones in Band of Brothers, Travis Marshall in Dexter and Officer Gus Grimly in Fargo, as well as co-starring in the 2010 Fox TV series The Good Guys.

He currently stars in the CBS sitcom Life in Pieces as Greg Short.

Early life

Hanks was born and raised in Sacramento, California, the oldest son of actor Tom Hanks and his first wife, producer and actress Samantha Lewes (married and maiden names Dillingham), who died of bone cancer on March 12, 2002. His name was changed to Hanks after his parents married in 1978. He has a sister, Elizabeth (born 1982), and two younger paternal half-brothers, Chester Marlon Hanks (born 1990) and Truman Theodore Hanks (born 1995), from his father's second marriage, to actress Rita Wilson. Hanks attended Sacramento Country Day School, and then Chapman University, before transferring to Loyola Marymount University. He left without taking a degree.

Career

In 1999, Hanks won the role of Alex Whitman in the science-fiction series Roswell, where he appeared for the first two seasons (making a brief appearance in the third). During that time, he acted in the teen comedies Whatever It Takes with Shane West and Get Over It with Ben Foster. Hanks also made an appearance in an episode of The OC. He appeared in part eight of HBO mini-series Band of Brothers as Lt. Henry Jones.In 2002, he starred in his first film as Shaun Brumder in Orange County, alongside Jack Black and Schuyler Fisk. The comedy features Hanks trying to get into Stanford University after his guidance counselor mistakenly sends out the wrong transcript.In 2005, he appeared in the remake of King Kong, playing the assistant to Jack Black's character. In 2006, Hanks had a cameo role in Black's Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny, playing a drunken fraternity brother. He starred in the romantic comedy The House Bunny, playing Oliver, a charming manager of a nursing home and the love interest of Anna Faris' character.

In 2008, he appeared in The Great Buck Howard, which was produced by his father and also starred John Malkovich. He also played Father Gill, a young Roman Catholic priest, in season 2 of the TV show Mad Men. In 2009, he made his Broadway debut, acting alongside Jane Fonda in the Moisés Kaufman play 33 Variations. In 2009, Hanks began work as director on All Things Must Pass, a documentary about Tower Records, that premiered March 17, 2015 at South by Southwest in Austin, Texas.

Hanks starred in the 2010 Fox TV series The Good Guys as young detective Jack Bailey, alongside Bradley Whitford who played an old school detective (Dan Stark).In 2011, he starred in the indie film Lucky, alongside Ari Graynor, Ann-Margret and Jeffrey Tambor. He also joined the cast of Dexter for season six opposite Edward James Olmos, where he portrays an art historian Travis Marshall who is involved in a murderous apocalyptic cult.

In 2013, he starred as Allison in the second season of the web series Burning Love. That same year he also portrayed Dr. Malcolm Perry in the historical film Parkland. In 2014, he played Officer Gus Grimly in the FX television series Fargo, for which he received a Critics' Choice and Primetime Emmy Award nomination.

Hanks directed the documentary All Things Must Pass: The Rise and Fall of Tower Records, released in 2015. The film received funding of nearly $100,000 through a Kickstarter campaign.

Personal life

In June 2009, Hanks became engaged to former New York publicist Samantha Bryant. The couple married on May 8, 2010, in Los Angeles. They have two daughters: Olivia Jane Hanks (born in 2011) and Charlotte Bryant Hanks (born in 2013).

Hanks is an avid fan of the San Francisco Giants baseball team, and attended their World Series-clinching victory in Texas in November 2010.  He is also a fan of the San Francisco 49ers, Sacramento Kings, and Los Angeles Kings. He was the official Kevin and Bean LA Kings playoff correspondent for the 2012 and 2013 seasons.

Filmography

Film

Television

Accolades


