
#Article: Justine Thornton
#Type: regular article

Justine Thornton (born 25 September 1970) is an English lawyer specializing in environmental law. She is the wife of Ed Miliband, the former Leader of the Labour Party. She is a former child actress who appeared in Dramarama and Hardwicke House.

Early life and education

Thornton was born in Manchester, to Labour-voting professionals  Margaret and Stewart Thornton. Her mother was born in Wales, and her GP grandfather, who was based in Ammanford, was a speaker on social affairs.  The family moved to Nottingham, where Justine was educated at West Bridgford School.

As a pupil at West Bridgford comprehensive school, she appeared to be heading for an acting career. Thornton was a member of the Central Junior Television Workshop at the age of 16. In 1987 she starred as Erica, a rebellious schoolgirl, in the hour-long pilot episode "The Visit" of Hardwicke House, an ITV sitcom that was later pulled from the schedules after only two episodes had been transmitted following a backlash over its content. In 1988, she appeared as Chrissie in an episode of the long-running children's programme Dramarama titled "Snap Decision", which was aired in January 1989.

Putting her acting career behind her, Thornton read Law at Robinson College, Cambridge, graduating in 1992. She was called to the bar in 1994.

Career

Thornton practises in environmental law, now at 39 Essex Street. The 2010 edition of Legal 500, the lawyers’ directory described her as “first class”.

She was appointed as an adviser to the British Government on biotechnology and the environment in 2000, a role she held until 2005 and was later on the Attorney General's C Panel. She was later Chair of SERA, the Labour environment campaign. She has also acted for the Welsh Assembly Government, and in 2009 was shortlisted for Chambers and Partners Environmental and Planning Junior of the Year.

Thornton has worked on several law related publications, as general editor of Sweet and Maxwell's Encyclopedia of Environmental Law, and a co-author of Sweet and Maxwell's textbook on environmental law. She also co-authored the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 Law Society Legislation Guides.

Thornton became an Associate Governor of Brookfield Primary School in 2009.

Personal life

Thornton's husband is the former Labour party leader Ed Miliband. They met in 2002, and live together in North London. The couple were engaged in March 2010, and married at Langar Hall near Nottingham on 27 May 2011. They have two sons - Daniel (b. 2009) and Samuel (b. 2010).

Thornton is a friend of Frances Osborne, the wife of current Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne, whom she met at university whilst studying law.


