
#Article: Keith Chegwin
#Type: regular article

Keith Chegwin (born 17 January 1957) is an English television presenter and actor.

Early life

Born in Bootle, Chegwin's early career started by entering an end of pier talent competition in Rhyl, North Wales. He joined 'The Happy Wanderers' a concert party that toured the pubs, clubs of the north west. He was then spotted by June Collins (Phil Collins's mother) of the Barbara Speake Stage School on Junior Showtime, a Yorkshire Television programme for young talent. She invited him to London to audition for the stage show Mame with Ginger Rogers. He attended stage school with his twin brother, Jeff. As part of a play he performed in at the school, Chegwin claims to have sung the first song that Phil Collins ever wrote.

While at school, Chegwin auditioned and got roles on TV, film and stage. He was in works of the Children's Film Foundation, appearing as Egghead Wentworth in The Troublesome Double (1967) and Egghead's Robot (1970). Chegwin's most prestigious acting role was that of Fleance in Roman Polanski's film Macbeth (1971), and he also played a small role in the 1973 film The Optimists of Nine Elms starring Peter Sellers. In 1973, he also appeared in the pilot episode of Open All Hours and then had smaller parts in The Liver Birds, The Adventures of Black Beauty, My Old Man, Village Hall, Z-Cars (both 1974), ITV's The Wackers and The Tomorrow People serial Worlds Away (both in 1975). His last major acting role was the title role in the film Robin Hood Junior (1975), although he had two small roles with Tom Courtenay in the Chester Mystery Cycle (1976) and some years later in the film Whatever Happened to Harold Smith? (1999). He appeared in TV ads for products such as Pepsi, Barley Water, Tizer and Cadbury Creme Eggs and even modelled underpants in the 'Freemans' catalogue

Chegwin performed in West End stage shows such as Tom Brown's School Days with Russell Grant and Simon LeBon, and The Good Old Bad Old Days with Anthony Newley and Captain Pugwash, written by Bill Kenwright.he had a career as a singer releasing singles on the Pye Records label. He also worked as a disc jockey for 194 Radio City, and four years at BBC Radio 1 on Tony Blackburn's weekend morning show.

Career

In the mid 1970s, Chegwin moved away from acting, becoming a household name presenting programmes such as Multi-Coloured Swap Shop, Cheggers Plays Pop and, in the 1980s, Saturday Superstore. As Brown Sauce, he and Swap Shop co-presenters Noel Edmonds and Maggie Philbin released the pop single "I Wanna Be a Winner", which reached number 15 in January 1982, and a follow-up single as the Saucers called "Spring Has Sprung". On Swap Shop and Superstore, he was featured in outside broadcasts; on Swap Shop they were called Swaparama, appearing at outdoor venues around Britain, where he helped children swap their toys. On Superstore, Chegwin had a similar role, only the toys were called Bargains and he worked on the Store's delivery van.

Chegwin is known for his off the cuff ad-lib style of broadcasting. He brags the fact that no one has ever written a word for him. Chegwin's career waned in the late 1980s and 1990s, due to his alcoholism, as detailed, in his own words, in his semi autobiographical book, Shaken But Not Stirred. In 1990, he hosted the live nightly Sky talent programme Sky Star Search. Chegwin stopped drinking after his appearance on the Richard and Judy show This Morning on 5 November 1992. Chegwin's career regained speed in 1993 when he presented the "Down Your Doorstep" outside broadcast segment on The Big Breakfast, in which he cried, "Wake up you beggars, it's Cheggers!". He subsequently hosted the show and, in 1999, went on to present a revived version of the 1970s gameshow It's a Knockout on Channel 5.

In 2000, Chegwin presented his own TV show on the World Wide Web, where his daily audience for the seven week trial reached over 250,000. His internet TV show 'Cheggersbedroom' was headline news - pioneering the start of live in-vision presenter advertising on the web. The BBC made a documentary featuring Chegwin and his ability to build a five camera outside broadcast unit at his home, present, direct, write his daily show for 10 hours a day -7 days a week. Chegwin presented the Channel 5 and Yorkshire Television nudist gameshow Naked Jungle, appearing naked except for a hat. He identifies making the show as "the worst career move" in his entire life.

Chegwin worked for seven years on GMTV. In 2006, he appeared as himself in an episode of the Ricky Gervais sitcom Extras, where he sent himself up and gained plaudits for doing so. He also has his own recording studio and video edit suite and does his voice over work from home. Chegwin frequently wrote jingles for the Chris Moyles Breakfast Show on BBC Radio 1. Chegwin has hosted the BAFTA television & film industry awards twice in London. He created his own web based bingo site 'Cheggersbingo' for seven years - the only internet bingo site owned by a celebrity.

In November 2011, the Kill Keith film. Chegwin also made an appearance in Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant's comedy series Life's Too Short with Shaun Williamson and Les Dennis. In August 2012, he was presented with a Lifetime Achievement Award at the National Reality TV Awards.

On 19 October 2013, he took part in a celebrity episode of The Chase. In September 2014, he was a contestant on BBC1's Pointless Celebrities show.

In 2015, Chegwin took part in the fifteenth series of Celebrity Big Brother on Channel 5. On 6 February, he finished in fourth place. He will also take part in the upcoming series of Celebrity MasterChef.

Dancing on Ice

Chegwin was originally set to take part in the sixth series of Dancing on Ice, but he was forced to withdraw after breaking three ribs and fracturing his shoulder on the first day of training with Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean. Chegwin joined the eighth series of Dancing on Ice partnered with Olga Sharutenko. Chegwin was eliminated on 17 February 2013. From October to January 2013, he played the part of Drosselmeyer in the 'Nutcracker On Ice' with prestigious Imperial Ice Stars from Russia at the London Palladium.

Personal life

Chegwin is married to Maria Anne Chegwin (née Fielden). They have a son Ted. He also has a daughter, Rose, from his previous marriage to presenter Maggie Philbin. Chegwin is the younger brother of DJ Janice Long.


