
#Article: Liberty Ross
#Type: regular article

Liberty Lettice Lark Ross (born 23 September 1978) is an English model and actress. She has appeared in publications such as Vogue, Harper's Bazaar, i-D, and Dazed & Confused. She played the role of Queen Eleanor in the 2012 fantasy film Snow White and the Huntsman, directed by her then-husband, Rupert Sanders. She is the sister of composers Atticus and Leopold Ross.

Career

Modelling

Ross was discovered by Mario Testino where he asked her and a group of friends to do a shoot for British Vogue.  She worked sporadically as a model throughout her childhood. She appeared on Ozzy Osbourne's No Rest for the Wicked album cover at the age of nine. In 1992 she signed with Storm Model Management.

In 2000, Ross became the face of an Emanuel Ungaro ad campaign. In May, Ross appeared on the twentieth anniversary cover of The Face alongside Kate Moss. In June, Ross appeared on the cover of British Vogue, shot by personal friend Mario Testino. Ross was then awarded Model of the Year at the Elle Style Awards.

Ross was photographed by Robin Derrick for the December 2000/January 2001 issue of Vogue Russia. In 2002, Ross shot Burberry's spring campaign alongside Kate Moss and Eva Herzigova. In January 2002, Ross again graced the cover of British Vogue, also photographed by Testino, alongside nine other British models including Kate Moss, Naomi Campbell, Stella Tennant and Erin O'Connor. Ross also appeared on the November 2002 cover of British magazine i-D, photographed by Kayt Jones.

In 2003, Ross became the face of the luxury footwear brand Jimmy Choo. She also graced the cover of Vogue Russia, photographed by Todd Barry.

In 2004 she modelled for Dior's Addict perfume. Ross then appeared in the Pirelli Calendar, photographed by Nick Knight. Shortly after, Ross began a three year hiatus to focus on her family life that ended in 2007 when she re-signed with Storm.

Return to Modelling

Following her husband’s well publicised affair, Ross began to stage a career comeback. appearing on the cover of online magazine The Edit and in the pages of Vanity Fair.Ross made her runway return in September 2012, walking for Alexander Wang at New York Fashion Week.

Other projects

Ross was a frequent collaborator with SHOWstudio appearing in multiple short films and projects.

Ross also contributed to British Vogue's online blog from 2009 to 2012.

In 2014 Ross was invited to design a capsule collection for Genetic Denim which was sold exclusively at Net-a-Porter.

Personal life

Ross married director Rupert Sanders in 2002. Though both Ross and Sanders are British, they moved to Los Angeles to further Sanders' career, and Ross focused on being a wife and mother. Together they have two children, daughter Skyla and son Tennyson. In July 2012, Us Weekly published photos of Sanders cheating on Ross with actress Kristen Stewart, prompting Sanders and Stewart to issue separate public apologies. Ross subsequently filed for divorce from Sanders in January 2013, seeking joint custody, spousal support, and legal fees. The divorce was finalised on 30 May 2014.

In 2014 Ross confirmed she was dating record producer Jimmy Iovine. In 2015, it was confirmed that she was engaged to Iovine. 

Filmography


