
#Article: Lucinda Creighton
#Type: regular article

Lucinda Creighton (born 20 January 1980) is an Irish politician. She has been a Teachta Dála (TD) for the Dublin South-East constituency since 2007. 

She served as the Minister of State for European Affairs from March 2011 to July 2013 until her resignation and loss of the Fine Gael parliamentary party whip. She then sat as an independent TD until March 2015, when the Renua Ireland party was launched.

Early life

Creighton grew up in County Mayo where her father was a bookmaker and her mother was a teacher. She is a graduate of Trinity College, Dublin, where she gained a Bachelor of Laws in 2002. She was a member of the Trinity College branch of Young Fine Gael. In 2003, she qualified as an attorney-at-law for the state of New York. She was called to the Irish bar in 2005.

Political career

Fine Gael

While at Trinity College, Creighton was elected Deputy Secretary General of the Youth of the European People's Party. She was elected to Dublin City Council in 2004, aged 24, representing the Pembroke local electoral area.

Creighton was elected to Dáil Éireann on her first attempt in the 2007 general election, as its youngest member, the first TD born in the 1980s. She was appointed Fine Gael spokesperson on European Affairs from 2007 to 2010. She was critical of party leader, Enda Kenny, during that period. In July 2010 she criticised what she termed the "cute hoor politics" in Fine Gael. In October 2010, she was appointed as party deputy spokesperson on Justice with special responsibility for Immigration, Integration and Equality.

She played a key role in Fine Gael's campaign for a yes vote in both referendums on the Lisbon Treaty. Creighton was re-elected in February 2011, topping the poll in Dublin South-East. Following Fine Gael's entry into government, she was appointed by Enda Kenny as the Minister of State for European Affairs.

On taking office, she was openly critical of the response by European leaders to the eurozone crisis, telling an audience in London in May 2011 that "European leaders have gone from contributing to the development of the Union to identifying what they can take from it and parade in front of their own electorates. While the European spirit lives on, what is absent is the willingness and courage to argue, communicate and persuade people that it is still a good idea."

During her time as minister, Creighton visited every EU member, candidate and aspiring country at least once, and represented the government at meetings and conferences such as the Croatia Summit in July 2012, the EU-ASEAN ministerial meeting in Brunei in April 2012 and the EU-ASEM meeting in Budapest in June 2011. Creighton was also the first Irish government minister to officially meet a minister from Burma when she met its foreign minister in April 2012.

Creighton was involved in the co-ordination of the planning an execution of Ireland's 2013 EU Presidency, chairing a government committee responsible for all policy preparations and oversight. In January 2013 she hosted a meeting of European affairs ministers in Dublin which focused on strengthening democratic accountability and legitimacy in the European Union, an issue she has highlighted many times. During the 2012 referendum on the Stability Treaty, Creighton played a central role, speaking at numerous public meetings and events. Along with Simon Coveney, she devised Fine Gael's campaign for a yes vote.

Renua Ireland

Creighton was expelled from the Fine Gael parliamentary party on 11 July 2013 when she defied the party whip by voting against the Protection of Life During Pregnancy Bill 2013. She also resigned as Minister of State. On 13 September 2013, she and six other expellees formed the Reform Alliance, described as a "loose alliance" rather than a political party. The move was criticised as indicative of suppressing independent voices and, as such, the need for having an independent Seanad. Creighton joined the Dáil Technical Group in September 2014.

On 2 January, Creighton announced that she was founding a new political party in Spring 2015. The party is being founded under four principles, including, Creighton claims, "building an economy for entrepreneurs" and "giving politics back to the people." Creighton said: "We want to reboot Ireland and we want those who are as passionate about this country as we are to join us on this mission". She hopes her new party will raise €1 million in small donations before the next general election.

On 13 March 2015, a new political party called Renua Ireland was launched, with Creighton as its leader.

Political positions

Foreign policy

Creighton is an opponent of Ireland's "triple-lock" system that means the deployment of the Irish Defence Forces outside of the State must first be prompted by a formal Government decision, then approved by the Dáil before being mandated by the United Nations. Creighton favours a system where only a Government and Dáil vote is necessary for military deployment outside the State as she views it is not a "viable position in Irish foreign policy that peacekeeping missions are dependent on a UN mandate when Russia and China get a veto."

Economic policy

Creighton was an early advocate of eurobonds as a potential solution to the eurozone crisis. She publicly called for the European Central Bank to become a lender of last resort following a meeting with her French counterpart in Paris in December 2012.

Creighton has said Sinn Féin’s economic policies are “absolutely hare-brained” and “would come close to bankrupting the country”.

Social policy

Creighton stated in February 2011 that while she supported civil partnerships, which was then in the process of coming into effect, she opposed same-sex marriage and that she believed that "marriage is primarily about children, main purpose being to propagate and create." Controversy surrounding the comment, and its resulting backlash made national papers, and led to official statements being issued by Fine Gael distancing the party from her comments. She later changed her view to support same-sex marriage.

Creighton is against abortion and believes "We celebrate the right of human beings to enjoy life - whether we speak of a criminal on death row, or an innocent baby girl, or a baby with Down syndrome. None of us are perfect, but our life is worthy and we are all worthy of life. Who are any one of us to determine that even one single life is not worth living, not worth protecting?"

Personal life

Creighton married Senator Paul Bradford, a former colleague in Fine Gael and now also a member of Renua, in April 2011. They have one daughter.


