
#Article: Edoardo Ponti
#Type: regular article

Edoardo Ponti (born January 6, 1973) is an Italian-American director. He is the son of actress Sophia Loren and producer Carlo Ponti, Sr. and brother of conductor Carlo Ponti.

Early life and education

Ponti was born in Geneva, Switzerland, on January 6, 1973, to actress Sophia Loren and producer Carlo Ponti, Sr.. Ponti studied at Aiglon College in Switzerland and graduated in 1990. In 1994, he graduated magna cum laude from the University of Southern California with a Bachelor of Arts degree in English Literature and Creative Writing. In 1997, he went on to earn his Master of Fine Arts degree in Film Directing & Production from the prestigious University of Southern California School of Cinema and Television.

Career

Between Strangers was the first feature film Edoardo Ponti wrote and directed. It was produced by Gabriella Martinelli and starred an ensemble cast which includes Sophia Loren, Mira Sorvino, Deborah Kara Unger, Gérard Depardieu, Pete Postlethwaite, and Malcolm McDowell. The film premiered at the Venice and Toronto International Film Festivals. It won five Genie nominations, the Canadian equivalent to the Academy Award. Ponti earned the best first-time filmmaker award from the Newport Beach Film Festival, as well as an award of merit from the Los Angeles Italian Film Festival.

In 2011, Ponti wrote and directed the romantic comedy Coming & Going starring Rhys Darby, Fionnula Flanagan, and Sasha Alexander, as well as Away we Stay, a branded short for the W Hotel Chain starring Helena Christensen and David Gandy, which premiered in London.

In 2012, Ponti directed, Il Turno di Notte lo fanno le stelle, his first Italian-language film, written by Erri de Luca, and starring Nastassja Kinski, Enrico Lo Verso, and Julian Sands. The same year, he starred as an actor in Michel Comte’s directorial debut, a film adaptation of Madam Butterly, in which he played the lead character, Pinkerton.

He is currently in preproduction, directing a film adaptation of Jean Cocteau’s one-act play The Human Voice, starring Sophia Loren. He is also attached to direct the British motion picture Payment Deferred starring Malcolm McDowell based on CS Forester’s bestselling novel and the period piece Behind her Smile produced by Fred Roos.

Ponti’s past film credits include a starring role in the film Aurora directed by Maurizio Ponzi, for which he earned a “Nastro d’Argento” nomination, Italy’s prestigious film critics' prize. The first short Ponti wrote and directed entitled Liv was executive produced by Robert Altman and Michelangelo Antonioni, and was premiered at the Venice International Film Festival.

Ponti also produced and directed Eugène Ionesco’s play The Lesson. He then went on to adapt for the stage, produce, and direct Nick Bantock’s best-selling epistolary trilogy Griffin & Sabine at the Spoleto Theatre Festival in Italy. He wrote and directed an opera with renowned Polish composer Zbigniew Preisner entitled Requiem for my Friend for which Warner Bros. awarded Ponti a platinum record.

Other ventures

In 2008, Ponti cofounded TakeHollywood.com, a premiere online service, which provides invaluable knowledge to all those wanting to enter the world of show business from A-list actors, directors, producers, casting directors, managers, and agents.

Personal life

Fluent in English, French, and Italian, Edoardo Ponti worked under the mentorship of master filmmaker Michelangelo Antonioni.

On August 11, 2007, Ponti married actress Sasha Alexander, in Geneva, Switzerland. Ponti and Alexander have two children, Lucia Sofia (born May 12, 2006) and Leonardo Fortunato (born December 20, 2010).

Filmography

	 Aurora (1984)

	Liv (1998)

	Between Strangers (2002)

	Coming & Going (2011)

	Away we stay (2011)

	The Nightshift Belongs to the Stars (2012)

	The Girl from Nagasaki (2013)

	The Human Voice (2014)


