
#Article: Marvin Humes
#Type: regular article

Marvin Richard James Humes (born 18 March 1985) is an English singer, actor, television presenter and radio DJ, best known as a former member of the boyband JLS, the runner-up boyband to Alexandra Burke in the fifth series of The X Factor. After a successful five years, JLS split in December 2013.

Since 2014, Humes has hosted BBC One's The Voice UK with Emma Willis.

Early life

Humes was born on 18 March 1985, in Greenwich, London. He is the son of a Jamaican father and Anglo-Scottish mother and is the middle child of two brothers, Leon and Jackson. Humes was bullied at school for wearing glasses.

Humes started his music career in a band called VS which was created by Blue member Simon Webbe; however shortly after being formed and releasing an album, they split. Humes appeared in Holby City on the BBC for three years from 2000 to 2003 playing Robbie Waring for 14 episodes. At the age of 14, he starred in a children's programme called K-Club, which helped people with computers and how they work.

Career

Beginnings and The X Factor

Oritsé Williams decided to get into the music business mainly. He was originally scouted for a number of boy bands but did not feel they were right, Williams decided to form his own boy band and, through friends, met Marvin Humes who had experience in R&B and pop music, being a part of VS in 2004. Next to join was Aston Merrygold, who was once cast in the ITV children's programme Fun Song Factory, because of his athletic ability. Last to join the group was JB Gill, for his "musical ear" and harmonies. They bonded, became friends and together they were called UFO (an initialism of Unique Famous Outrageous). They signed to Tracklacers developing a sound they then called "Jack the Lad Swing", combining the phrase "Jack the lad" and the urban music of new jack swing. While working their way into the music business, UFO instantly signed to Epic Records, before winning their first award in late 2007 at the Urban Music Awards for Best Unsigned Act thanks to their mash-up of "Stand by Me" by Ben E. King and "Beautiful Girls" by Sean Kingston. Shortly thereafter, they released their second single, "Slap Ya Elbow". The group give credit to 'DJ Triz' who produced one of UFO's first songs and helped them write it.

In 2008, UFO auditioned for the fifth series of The X Factor, but had to change their name because it was already being used by another group, so they decided to go with the name JLS (an initialism of Jack the Lad Swing, the style created with Tracklacers some months back). Following the elimination of girl groups Bad Lashes and Girlband in weeks one and two respectively, JLS were Louis Walsh's last remaining act in the competition, but throughout the live shows the judges called them the best band to come out of The X Factor. In week 7, JLS were in the bottom two along with Rachel Hylton. However, they survived thanks to votes from Walsh, Cheryl Cole and Simon Cowell. Cowell stated when casting his deciding vote that JLS did not deserve to be in the bottom two. In week 8, JLS performed "...Baby One More Time" and received negative comments from two of the four judges, with Cowell saying "at the moment you're out", but after their second performance, "You Light Up My Life", Cowell commented that they were "back in the race" and that they could "have a hit record" with the performance.

In week 9, JLS performed "Umbrella" and "I'm Already There". Cowell then predicted they would win the competition. They made it to the final and performed their own version of the winner's song, "Hallelujah", which the other finalist Alexandra Burke also performed. The public voted for the second time that night and Burke won the competition, JLS coming second. They were the fourth band to make the final. Following their success on The X Factor, Cowell's record company, Syco, announced that they were to sign JLS with an advance payment of £75,000. The Sun later reported on 20 January 2009 that Cowell had revoked this offer, having instead decided to focus on Alexandra Burke. JLS's manager thought the band would be well suited to Epic Records, with whom they signed a record contract in January 2009.

2006-13: JLS

After meeting future fellow band member Oritsé Williams, Humes joined boyband UFO. He then encouraged acquaintance Aston Merrygold to audition for the boyband. However, after auditioning for The X Factor, UFO changed their name to JLS, a name thought up by Humes' girlfriend at the time. Following their appearance on The X Factor, JLS signed to Epic Records. Their first two singles "Beat Again" and "Everybody in Love" both went to number one on the UK Singles Chart. The band's self-titled debut album was released on 9 November 2009, and has since sold over 1 million copies in the UK. JLS won the awards for British Breakthrough and British Single ("Beat Again") at the 2010 BRIT Awards. They also won several awards at the Mobo awards for Best song for "Beat Again" in 2009 and also Best Newcomer in the same year. In 2010, they won the MOBO Awards for Best UK act and Best Album. They also went on to win their fifth MOBO Award in 2012 by winning Best Video for "Do You Feel What I Feel?". They won the title of the UK's hardest-working band for two constitutive years, in 2011 and 2012.

In 2010, JLS signed a record deal in the United States with Jive Records, and released "Everybody in Love" as their debut US single, but it failed to chart. "The Club Is Alive", the lead single from their second studio album, was released in the UK in July 2010, and earned the band their third number-one on the UK Singles Chart. Their single "Love You More", the official single for Children in Need in 2010, was the group's fourth UK number one. Their single "She Makes Me Wanna" featuring Dev was their fifth UK number one. As of 2012, their debut album and single has been named one of The X Factors top ten biggest-selling debut singles and albums. JLS have sold more than 10 million records worldwide. As of 2013, they are the sixteenth richest reality TV stars in the UK, with an estimated fortune of £6 million per member, totalling £24 million.

In December 2012, Humes signed with an acting agent, hoping that landing a part in a credible show would give him the platform to launch a career in acting after JLS came to an end.On 24 April 2013, it was announced that the band were to split after their fifth album and tour. They released their last book as a band called Forever and a Day, One Last Goodbye X on 24 October 2013.JLS' last ever performance was on 22 December 2013 on the last night of their "Goodbye - The Greatest Hits Tour".

LuvBug

On 23 July 2014, Humes announced through social networking sites that he had formed a new dance group featuring 'The White N3RD & JKAY called LuvBug. They were officially signed to Polydor Records and their first single, "Resonance" featuring Talay Riley, was released on 5 October 2014. It charted at number thirteen on the week of 18 October 2014. The follow-up single, "Revive (Say Something)", features vocals from Mark Asari and will be released on 26 January 2014.

Radio

In March 2013, Humes began hosting his own radio show on the Capital network on Friday and Saturday evenings. He now hosts his own show on Capital airing Monday through to Friday from 7pm to 10pm and on Saturday 8pm to 11pm.

On 5 January 2014, Humes replaced Rich Clarke on The Vodafone Big Top 40 Show with Kat Shoob, aired on Capital. and Heart.

Television

Humes made his television presenting debut on 23 August 2013, when he co-presented ITV's This Morning with his wife Rochelle Humes. The couple have since become regular stand-in presenters.

Since 2013, Humes has been a regular reporter for ITV's Surprise Surprise.

In September 2013, Humes was confirmed as Reggie Yates' replacement for the third series of BBC One's The Voice UK, which began on 11 January 2014. He co-hosts the programme with Emma Willis. He will still host the next series of The Voice UK.

Online

In Late 2013, Humes launched "The Marvin Humes Channel" a "website and app for iPhone or Android smartphone devices that allows you to catch up on Marvin's activity 24 hours a day". This channel has since stopped. Marvin now has a website.

Personal life

Humes is a fan of Chelsea F.C.. His biggest inspiration is Michael Jackson.

Humes started dating The Saturdays singer Rochelle Wiseman in March 2010 and they moved in together in August 2010. They got engaged in December 2011 and married in July 2012 at Blenheim Palace. On 20 May 2013, Wiseman gave birth to their first child; a daughter called Alaia-Mai. Humes was nominated for "Celebrity Dad of the Year 2013", but lost to Olympic gold medallist Mo Farah.

Other Ventures

Product and endorsements

In September 2010, a "Marvin doll" was launched, along with the other 3 members of JLS.  Updated dolls were produced for the launch of JLS' 2nd album "outta this world".

Durex Teamed up with JLS to produce a condom range called "Just Love Safe", with each member of the group having their own box. Marvins box being green. JLS also released their iconic hoodie range, with Marvins Hoodie being, again, green.

In 2010, JLS endorsed Nintendo Wii Party appearing in seven different TV advertisements. JLS where also part of the Walkers crisps "Make sandwich more exciting" advertising campaign, they're performance at Sandwich Technology School appeared on the television ad alongside other celebrities such as Gary Lineker, Pamela Anderson and Jenson Button.

Philanthropy

JLS founded "The JLS Foundation" a foundation that sets out to raise money for 6 different charities: Cancer Research UK, Rays of Sunshine, Brook, Childline, BeatBullying and the MS Society. Despite the split, the foundation still exists and all members are still committed to continue the foundation.

All sales from the JLS number one single Love You More went to Children In Need. In 2012, JLS performed at the "Children In Need Rocks Manchester" concert performing Take a Chance on Me. In 2013, JLS appeared on Children In Need for the last time, where the group sang a medley of songs on the EastEnders set.

JLS has also helped raise money for Comic Relief, appearing in comedy sketches with both Miranda Hart  and James Corden.

In 2012, JLS visited Uganda for Sport Relief appearing in emotional VT's across the night. The same year JLS released the official sport relief Charity single Proud which peaked at number 6 in the chart, as well as hosting a special charity concert "JLS sing for Sport Relief" and doing the Sport Relief Mile.

In total, JLS have recorded 5 charity singles: A cover of Mariah Carey's song Hero as part of the X Factor 2008 finalists (for Help for Heroes), Wishing On A Star Xfactor finalists ft. JLS and One Direction (For organization Together for Short Lives) Love You More (for Children In Need), Proud (for Sport Relief) and Everybody Hurts (for Helping Haiti). 4 out of 5 of these charity singles got to number one on the UK singles chart.


