
#Article: Meeno Peluce
#Type: regular article

Meeno Peluce (born February 26, 1970) is an American photographer and former child actor.

Peluce was born in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, the son of Sandra N. (née Londy), a personal manager and caterer, and Floyd N. Peluce, a certified public accountant. He has one half-sister, actress Soleil Moon Frye, whose father is actor Virgil Frye.

With dark curly hair and pixieish looks, Peluce made guest appearances on American television programs during the 1970s and early 1980s, including Starsky and Hutch, Kojak, Benson, The Love Boat, Diff'rent Strokes, The Incredible Hulk, Happy Days, The A-Team, Silver Spoons, Manimal, Remington Steele, Scarecrow and Mrs. King, and on Punky Brewster with his half-sister (who played the title character). Among his regular television roles were Tanner Boyle in The Bad News Bears, Daniel Best in Best of the West, and as history prodigy Jeffrey Jones in Voyagers!. He appeared in the pilot episode of the M*A*S*H spin-off W*A*L*T*E*R with Gary Burghoff, but the series was not picked up.

In 1984, Peluce was devastated by the death of his Voyagers! co-star and close friend, Jon-Erik Hexum. In 1998, Peluce spoke about the accidental shooting on Mysteries and Scandals: The Death Of Jon-Erik Hexum.

Peluce is married and has two children. He has also worked as a writer and director.He also appeared in several made-for-TV movies, including Night Cries, Fast Friends, and World War III, and in the original theatrical release of The Amityville Horror, as one of the Lutz children. Peluce also appeared in the music video for "The Last in Line" by the group Dio.

After growing up, Peluce attended at UC Santa Cruz and became a history teacher, with a position at Hollywood High School in the late 1990s. He returned to film during 1998, co-writing and co-producing Wild Horses (a.k.a. Lunch Time Special) with sister Soleil Moon Frye, and in 2001 when he appeared in Alex in Wonder (also titled Sex and a Girl).

Peluce is a photographer with many celebrity studio sessions to his credit. He showcases his photographs, along with writings, at his website.

He lives with his wife, Ilse, and their two daughters, India and Mette, in Los Angeles.


