
#Article: Christine Fernandes
#Type: regular article

Christine Fernandes Alves (born March 1, 1968 in Chicago, Illinois) is an American Brazilian actress.

Born in Chicago, Illinois, to Brazilian parents, Christine moved to Brazil at 4 years old. At 13 she started playing volleyball and became federated. Soon after she began modeling. At 17 she moved back to the United States to attend High School in California. When she turned 18, she moved to Japan and lived in Tokyo for 2 years working as a photographic model.

She returned to Brazil in 1995 and was invited to act on a telenovela (Brazilian soap opera) beginning her acting career. She is married to the fellow Brazilian actor Floriano Peixoto.

Biography

The daughter of Brazilian parents was born and lived until 3 years of age in the United States. His family returned to Brazil, to the city of Rio de Janeiro. 

From thirteen to seventeen years was volleyball player, soon after became an international model for seven years. She studied in Califórnia many years of high school to university, when she returned there and lived alone. There she also paraded. Christine also lived in Japan for two years.

After a test for the Actors Workshop of Rede Globo, was cast in his first TV appearance, an interest in the novel Quatro por Quatro (1994), of Carlos Lombardi. The following year, Manoel Carlos bet the young actress and gave her a prominent role in História de Amor. Among other works, Christine attended Perdidos de Amor, a novel independent Rede Bandeirantes, but soon returned and appeared in the Rede Globo productions as Chiquinha Gonzaga (1999) and Esplendor (2000), in which she met the actor Marcelo Serrado, with whom she was married from 1994 to 1999.

She made her first appearance on film in Slapstick and O Trapalhão e a Luz Azul (1999), Paulo Aragão Neto and Alexandre Boury.

with the novel Essas Mulheres, she had her recognition, being the protagonist of the story. Then novel Christine participated Páginas da Vida.

In 2007 Christine was in the cast of the play Hedda Glaber. Christine joined the cast of the soap opera A Favorita in 2008. The actress in 2009, joined the cast of soap opera Viver a Vida of Rede Globo.

In 2010 Christine joined the cast of the seventh season of Dança dos Famosos, under the Domingão do Faustão. In 2011 she presented the program Saia Justa, in the GNT, along with Dan Stulbach, Eduardo Moscovis, Mônica Waldvogel, Teté Ribeiro, Xico Sá and Léo Jaime, but left the program because of personal problems and was replaced by actress Camila Morgado.

In 2012 she was in the episode A Fofoqueira de Porto Alegre in series As Brasileiras and made participation in the novels Avenida Brasil of João Emanuel Carneiro, in which he played Mônica and Cheias de Charme, in which he played the American journalist Scarlet. In the same year returns to cinemas with the film De Pernas pro Ar 2.

She is married to actor Floriano Peixoto, who has a son, Pedro, born in July 2003.

Career

Television

Films

Theater


