
#Article: Olivier Sarkozy
#Type: regular article

Pierre Olivier Sarkozy (born 26 May 1969) is a French banker based in the United States. His half-brother is Nicolas Sarkozy, former President of France.

Early life

Sarkozy was born in France, to Pal Sarkozy de Nagy-Bocsa, of Hungarian descent, and Christine de Ganay, of French descent. His father was previously married and had three children with his first wife, including Nicolas, with whom Sarkozy met weekly during his early childhood. De Ganay divorced Pal Sarkozy, and then married a American diplomat, when Sarkozy was 7. He spent the rest of his childhood and adolescence outside France, living in Zambia, Egypt, and a boarding school in the UK. Sarkozy later studied at the University of St Andrews, where he earned an M.A. in medieval history.

Career

In 1990 Sarkozy was hired by American investment bank Dillon, Read & Co.. He left three years later to join Credit Suisse First Boston, where he held several senior posts, including Managing Director in the Financial Institutions Group.

While at CSFB, Sarkozy advised Wachovia in its merger of equals with First Union and concurrent defense against a competing hostile proposal from Suntrust, Dime Bancorp in its merger with Washington Mutual, CoreStates Financial in its sale to First Union, and Wells Fargo in its merger with Norwest Corporation and acquisition of First Interstate, and others.

In January 2003 he joined UBS Investment Bank, where he was Global Co-Head of the Financial Institutions Group. At UBS, he worked on such transactions as Sallie Mae's attempt to go private and subsequent recapitalization, ABN Amro's $21 billion sale of LaSalle Bank to Bank of America, Mellon's $17 billion merger of equals with the Bank of New York, Charles Schwab's sale of U.S. Trust to Bank of America, MBNA's $36 billion sale to Bank of America, Wachovia's $14 billion acquisition of Southtrust, National Commerce's $7 billion sale to Suntrust, and Regions Financial's $6 billion merger of equals with Union Planters. 

Sarkozy was responsible for CIBC's $2.9 billion recapitalization and Sallie Mae's $3.0 billion recapitalization. He also acted as lead advisor in a number of other notable transactions, including Dime Bancorp's private placement of preferred and other equity securities to Warburg Pincus, as part of their successful defense against a hostile tender offer from North Fork to the recapitalization of Glendale Federal Bank, representing the then- largest recapitalization in history. On March 3, 2008, he was appointed Co-head and Managing Director of the Carlyle Group's Global Financial Services Group. Olivier Sarkozy is based in New York City and is a member of the Board of Directors of BankUnited.

Personal life

In the 1990s, Sarkozy married Charlotte Bernard, a freelance fashion writer and author of children's books, who grew up in Paris. They were married by his half-brother, Nicolas, who was then mayor of Neuilly-sur-Seine. They have two children. Sarkozy and Bernard were married for 14 years before separating in 2010, with their divorce being finalized the following year.

Sarkozy began a relationship with actress Mary-Kate Olsen in May 2012. The two were married on November 27, 2015, at a private residence in New York City.


