
#Article: Parviz Parastui
#Type: regular article

Parviz Parastui (also spelt Parastooee or Parastouei,  پرویز پرستویی , born 24 June 1955) is an Iranian actor and singer.

Personal life

Parviz Parastui was born in Kabudrahang, Hamadan province and is of Iranian Azerbaijani descent.

Career beginning

Parviz Parastui had worked in judicature before he became an actor. He began his career by starring in the film Diar-e Asheghan. Following Diar-e Asheghan, Parastui began a long lasting career in films.

Film career

After starring in films such as Pishtazan-e Fath, Hunting, etc., Parviz Parastui acted as Sadeq Meshkini, a comedy role in the highly acclaimed yet controversial movie Leily is with Me directed by Kamal Tabrizi. The war film Leily Is with Me brought a new perspective to the Iran-Iraq War which up to then was viewed as taboo material. The movie tells the comical story of a war-fearing employee of Iranian Television Broadcasting unknowingly advancing straight to enemy lines, while actually trying to flee the war when he is assigned to accompany a director to a city close to enemy lines to film a documentary piece.Since then, Parastui has expanded his presence as a comedy film actor by starring in other revolutionary comedy films.

Parviz Parastui also starred in some war films like: The Red Ribbon,The Glass Agency, Dead Wave, etc. Ebrahim Hatamikia directed most of Parastui's war films.Parviz Parastui had been known as a comedian with playing roles in The Snowman, The Glass Love, Mard-e Avazi before he played a role in the satire film The Lizard, another work by Kamal Tabrizi.He gained major popularity and fame after playing in Marmoulak as Reza Marmoulak. Parastui in The Willow Tree, Majid Majidi The role of Joseph, Performance was brilliant.Today, Reza Mirkarimi Latest Movie of Important He is.

Television career

Parastui's TV works are limited to some series such as: The Apartment, Imam Ali, The Red Soil, Under the Pillory (Zir-e Tigh) .Parastui's acting in Under the Pillory (Zir-e Tigh) gained him widespread admiration by the people. He was awarded the Best Actor title in International TV Programs Rome Festival for playing in Zire Tigh.

Filmography

Musical activities

Besides acting in movies and on stage, Parastui is a singer and so far has recorded three Albums. His First album called Daddy (بابایی) was released in 2006 and album Im Parviz Parastui (من پرویز پرستویی) was released in 2013. Parastui latest Album name I'm an Actor (من یک بازیگرم) was released in 2014.

See also

	Fatemeh Motamed Aria, Parviz Parastui's partner in several films

	Reza Kianian

	Mohammad Reza Honarmand


