
#Article: Marvi Memon
#Type: regular article

Marvi Memon (ماروي ميمڻ), (ماروی میمن; 21 July 1972), is a Pakistani politician and businesswoman, serving as the central and public figure of the Pakistan Muslim League (N) (PML-N) presided by Nawaz Sharif.

Family and Education

Marvi Memon was born in Karachi, Sindh Province of Pakistan to Nisar Memon a prominent educator, statesman, and former Senator from Sindh. After schooling in Karachi, Paris and Kuwait, she graduated from the London School of Economics with a B.Sc. (Econ) Honors in International Relations.

Professional Experience

With internships at Dawn, Newsline, Pakistan Institute of International Affairs, US Commercial Consulate, International Union for Conservation of Nature during her education years, she started her career as a banker at Citibank Pakistan where she specialized in Marketing and Quality Management for the consumer bank. After which she launched Pakistan’s first satellite tracking fleet management concern Trakker, which established her as an entrepreneur and the youngest woman CEO of a multinational firm at the time. Her next assignment led her to advising the President of Pakistan on Media Management. After which she advised on Investments. 

Political Party Worker

She served as Member of Parliament for the first time from March 2008 to June 2011 as a PMLQ MNA. She was a member of the parliamentary committees on Environment, Information Technology, Kashmir Gilgit-Baltistan. Her groundbreaking legislation on acid crime  and setting up Pakistan’s first research institute for parliamentarians (PIPS)  led her to be part of Pakistan’s first Oscar winning documentary.

Resignation from National Assembly Seat and PML-Q

On 22 June 2011, Memon resigned both from the Pakistan Muslim League (Q) (PML-Q), because of her stated concerns regarding the party's "corrupt and incompetent treasury benches". She resigned simultaneously from her post in the National Assembly.

She resigned from the parliament and left PML-Q in 2011 after her party joined the government. After that she launched a movement for rights in Pakistan  and galvanized rural Sindh’s villages for change. She joined PMLN in March 2012 and toured all of Pakistan spreading the PMLN message for a year during which she set up a new constituency for PMLN in feudal rural Thatta Sindh. She was chairperson of the Interprovincial subcommittee of the PMLN Manifesto committee prior to the May 2013 elections and developed consensus on many inter-provincial harmony issues within the party. Having attempted to get elected from a general seat from Thatta NA 237 she joined parliament as PMLN MNA on reserved seat from Sindh.

2013 Pakistan General Elections

Marvi contested 11 May 2013 general election of Pakistan from NA-237 constituency (Thatta), on the ticket of Pakistan Muslim League-NAWAZ. Marvi was nominated by PML-N party as a member of the National Assembly from Sindh's reserved seats for women. Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif had welcomed her to join his party - he was quoted as saying, "Marvi's approach towards issues is pragmatic. She will prove to be an asset for the party."

Political Achievements

She is one of the first parliamentarians to have pursued public interest litigation in the superior judiciary and being petitioner for many record making verdicts related to flood management, air crashes and worker rights. She has written many research papers and articles on foreign affairs. She is the first parliamentarian of Pakistan to author parliamentary diaries ‘My Diaries’ published in 2012.  Her last assignment within parliament was Chairperson for the National Assembly Committee for Information Broadcasting and Heritage, and Member of the Standing Committee of the National Assembly on Foreign Affairs. Her committee made record recommendations and published record reports in 15 months of her tenure to improve media management and media standards. Her strength is her close contact with grassroots, youth and discriminated populations of society in all provinces and territories of Pakistan as Pakistan’s most widely campaigning parliamentarian.She was appointed Chairperson of Benazir Income Support Program with status of Minister of State on Feb 25 2015.


