
#Article: Chris Grayling
#Type: regular article

Christopher Stephen Grayling (born 1 April 1962) is a British Conservative Party politician who is the Leader of the House of Commons and the Lord President of the Council since 2015. He was the Lord Chancellor and Secretary of State for Justice from 2012 to 2015.

First elected to Parliament in the 2001 general election for Epsom and Ewell, he was first appointed to the Shadow Cabinet of David Cameron in 2005 as Shadow Secretary of State for Transport. From 2007 he became the Shadow Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, and in 2009 he was appointed Shadow Home Secretary. Following the 2010 general election and the formation of the Coalition Government, Grayling was made the Minister of State for Employment.

In September 2012, he was appointed to the Cabinet in a reshuffle, replacing Kenneth Clarke as the Lord Chancellor and Secretary of State for Justice. He is the first non-lawyer to have served as Lord Chancellor for at least 440 years. (It was reported that the last such non-lawyer was the Earl of Shaftesbury in 1672-3; but the Earl was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1638.)

Early life

Grayling was born in London and grew up in Buckinghamshire, where he was educated at the Royal Grammar School, High Wycombe. He then went to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he graduated with an upper-second class Bachelor of Arts degree in history in 1984.

Early adulthood

Grayling joined BBC News in 1985 as a trainee, becoming a producer in 1986. He left the BBC in 1988 to join Channel 4 as an editor on its Business Daily television programme. He rejoined the BBC in 1991 as a business development manager on BBC Select. On leaving the BBC again in 1993, he ran several television production companies, including managing the corporate communications division of Workhouse Ltd from 1992-95 and SSVC Group in Gerrards Cross from 1995-97. He became a management consultant in 1997 with Burson Marsteller, where he remained until his election to Parliament.

Prior to joining the Conservative Party, Grayling was a member of the Social Democratic Party.

Political career

Borough Councillor (1998-2002)

Grayling was selected to contest the Labour-held marginal seat of Warrington South at the 1997 general election, but was defeated by Labour candidate Helen Southworth by 10,807 votes. He was elected as a councillor for the Hillside ward in the London Borough of Merton in 1998 and remained on the council until 2002.

Elected Member of Parliament (2001)

Grayling was elected to the House of Commons to represent the Surrey seat of Epsom and Ewell at the 2001 general election following the retirement of the veteran Tory MP Archie Hamilton. Grayling held the seat with a majority of 10,080 and has been returned as MP there since. He made his maiden speech on 25 June 2001.

Shadow Cabinet (2001-2010)

Grayling served on the Environment, Transport and the Regions Select Committee from 2001 until he was promoted to the Opposition Whips' Office by Iain Duncan Smith in 2002, moving to become a Spokesman for Health later in the year. He became a Spokesman for Education and Skills by Michael Howard in 2003. Following the 2005 general election he became a member of Howard's Shadow Cabinet as Shadow Leader of the House of Commons, and since the election of David Cameron as the leader of the Conservative Party in December 2005 he has served as the Shadow Secretary of State for Transport. In June 2007, he was made Shadow Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, a post he held until January 2009 when he became Shadow Home Secretary.

Conservative "attack-dog"

Grayling became known as a national politician through his “attack dog” pressure on leading Labour politicians. He was heavily involved in the questioning of David Blunkett, the then Work and Pensions Secretary, over his business affairs which led to Blunkett's resignation in 2005. Grayling also challenged Tony Blair and his wife Cherie over the money they made from lectures while Blair was Prime Minister. He also challenged minister Stephen Byers over his handling of the Railtrack collapse.

Government Minister (2010-)

On 28 May 2010, Grayling was appointed to the Privy Council in the 2010 Dissolution of Parliament Honours List.

Grayling served as Minister of State for Work and Pensions from 2010 until 2012, before being promoted to the Cabinet, on 4 September 2012, as Lord Chancellor and Secretary of State for Justice. Sworn in as Lord Chancellor on 1 October 2012 at Westminster Abbey, he was elected an Honorary Bencher of Gray's Inn on 11 December 2012, due in part to his lack of legal qualifications.

He was chided for his ignorance of protocol at the Queen's Speech on 8 May 2013. though Buckingham Palace subsequently clarified that he had done nothing wrong.

Grayling's appointment was widely seen as a return to a more hard line approach than that of his predecessor, Clarke.  Since his promotion, Grayling has pursued a tough justice agenda, including ending automatic early release for terrorists and child rapists, ending simple cautions for serious offences  and introducing greater protections for householders who defend themselves against intruders.

One of Grayling's first acts at the Ministry of Justice was to commence a large project to change the way offenders are rehabilitated in an effort to cut reoffending rates. Private companies as well as charities will play a great role in looking after offenders on licence in the community under a system of 'payment by results'.  Commentators have described this programme as being evidence of 'compassionate Conservatism'.

Grayling's proposed changes to legal aid have been widely criticised by the legal profession. In May 2013, 90 Queen's Counsels signed a letter sent to the Daily Telegraph, in which the changes were branded "unjust", as they would seriously undermine the rule of law.

In February 2014, he introduced the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015 to the House of Commons. The Bill has been well received in many quarters, including measures to outlaw 'revenge porn' and provide greater powers to deal with internet trolls

In October 2014 Grayling unveiled the Conservative Party's proposals  for reforms to human rights in order to stop the European Court of Human Rights being able to order British Courts what to do, whilst enshrining the text of the original Convention on Human Rights in a British Bill of Rights and Responsibilities

Grayling's ban on books being sent into UK prisons has been widely criticized by the Howard League for Penal Reform and the literary establishment, including Philip Pullman, Mark Haddon, Anthony Horowitz, Susan Hill and Emma Donoghue. The ban was described as obscene by Shaun Attwood of the TV show Banged Up Abroad who read over 1000 books in prison and credited books for being the lifeblood of rehabilitation.  This has however been defended as being not about a ban on books being sent into prison, but about parcels being sent in, as giving prisons access to the latter would almost certainly increase the amount of contraband getting into the prison estate.

In December 2013, Alan Turing was granted a pardon by the Queen, after a process initiated by Grayling in his capacity as Lord Chancellor.  At the time, Grayling said that he believed that Turing was 'one of our great national heroes who did as much as anyone to save us during the Second World War'.

Grayling introduced court charges "with no consultation or debate" in April 2015. The mandatory flat-fee court charges for magistrates court are £150 for a guilty plea and £750 when pleading non-guilty. Lawyers fear that defendants may plead guilty to avoid falling into debt, and the president of the Law Society described the change as a threat to fair trials. The charges for crown court are up to £1,200.

After the 2015 general election, Grayling was appointed Leader of the House of Commons and Lord President of the Council. Michael Gove replaced him as Secretary of State for Justice and Lord Chancellor. Gove is reported to be unimpressed with Grayling's "innovations", and (according to Private Eye), having "divorced the Ministry of Justice from Grayling's dodgy prison deal with the ... Saudis'", Gove is now reviewing "Grayling's highly controversial criminal court charges".

Controversies

Expenses claims

Between 2001 and 2009, Grayling claimed expenses for his flat in Pimlico, close to the Houses of Parliament, despite having a constituency home no further than 17 miles away and owning two buy to let properties in Wimbledon. Grayling says he uses the flat when "working very late" because he needs to "work very erratic and late hours most days when the House of Commons is sitting."

During the Parliamentary expenses scandal, The Daily Telegraph reported that Grayling refitted and redecorated the flat in 2005 costing over £5,000. Grayling said that both the water and electrical systems failed "leaving the place needing a major overhaul".

Grayling's expenses issue was seen as embarrassing for the Conservative Party as he had previously criticised Labour ministers for being implicated in sleaze scandals.

Comparing Moss Side to The Wire

As Shadow Home Secretary, Grayling provoked controversy in August 2009 when he compared Manchester's Moss Side area to the American TV crime drama The Wire. His comments received angry responses from Manchester locals and police. Having been out on patrol for a day with the police, observing the results of a shooting at a house, he described himself as having witnessed an "urban war". Police responded that gang-related shootings in Greater Manchester had fallen by 82 percent from the previous year and that to speak of "urban war" was "sensationalistic". A local councillor, Roy Walters, complained of Moss Side unfairly being a "negative target" due to historical associations. He was, however, defended by right wing commentators who said he spoke for the “mainstream majority”. Sticking by his comments, Grayling said, "I didn't say Moss Side equals Baltimore. What I said is that we have in Moss Side symptoms of a gang conflict in this country which I find profoundly disturbing." Baltimore, with a population of about 600,000, was noted as having 191 gun related murders in the previous year, in comparison to Moss Side, population 17,537, which had none.

Statistics controversy

Grayling came under fire as Shadow Home Secretary over the Conservative Party's use of statistics on violent crime. In February 2010, the Conservative Party issued press releases to every constituency in the UK claiming that crime had "risen sharply" in the UK. They failed, however, to take into account the more rigorous system for recording crime. The chairman of the UK Statistics Authority, Sir Michael Scholar, said that the figures Grayling was using were "likely to mislead the public" and "likely to damage public trust in official statistics" as the way in which crime was calculated had been changed in 2002. Scholar further added that reliable statistics showed that there had not been an increase in crime during Labour's period in office. A Conservative commissioned report by the independent House of Commons library suggested that, depending on how figures were calculated, Grayling's claims may have been justifiable and that violent crime may have risen in the period between 1998 and 2009. The incumbent Home Secretary, Alan Johnson called Grayling's use of crime statistics "dodgy" and that, using the British Crime Survey, it could be shown that violent crime had, in fact, reduced by 41% over the same period.

Gay couples in B&Bs controversy

In March 2010, Grayling was recorded at an open meeting of the Centre for Policy Studies think tank saying that during the debates on civil liberties under the Labour Government, he had felt that Christians should have the right to live by their consciences and that Christian owners of bed and breakfasts should have the right to turn away gay couples. Grayling said:"I personally always took the view that, if you look at the case of should a Christian hotel owner have the right to exclude a gay couple from a hotel, I took the view that if it's a question of somebody who's doing a B&B in their own home, that individual should have the right to decide who does and who doesn't come into their own home. If they are running a hotel on the high street, I really don’t think that it is right in this day and age that a gay couple should walk into a hotel and be turned away because they are a gay couple, and I think that is where the dividing line comes."

When the recording was released by The Observer, on 3 April 2010, Grayling's comments caused uproar, with Ben Summerskill, Chief Executive of the gay rights group Stonewall, saying that this position would be "illegal" and "very alarming to a lot of gay people who may have been thinking of voting Conservative". Lord Mandelson, the most senior gay minister in the (then Labour) Government, added that the comment showed that the Conservative Party had not changed, that "when the camera is on they say one thing, but when the camera is off they say another". There were calls for Grayling to resign after this incident. Conservative Party leader David Cameron was subsequently urged to "back or sack" Grayling, with gay rights campaigner Peter Tatchell saying that "Cameron's silence is worrying. Many voters - gay and straight - will be disturbed by his failure to swiftly disown Grayling's support for homophobic discrimination. What does this say about the sincerity and seriousness of his commitment to gay equality?" A poll for the website www.pinknews.co.uk released on 5 April found that support for the Conservatives in the LGBT community had fallen drastically since Grayling's comments. Author Douglas Murray has dubbed Grayling "a political buffoon, unsure of what he is saying and with little idea of how to say it." Anastasia Beaumont-Bott, founder of LGBTory, a gay rights group which campaigns for the Conservatives, announced that she would be voting for Labour, not the Conservatives, in response to Grayling's comments. She said, "I feel guilty because as a gay woman affected by LGBT rights I am on record saying you should vote Conservative, and I want to reverse that. I want to go on record to say don't vote Conservative. I'd go as far to say that I'll vote Labour at this general election." Beaumont-Bott was joined in defecting from the Conservatives to Labour a week later by prominent gay rights campaigner David Heathcote. Grayling’s comments, however, were defended by a number of commentators, including the Today Programme presenter and leading gay broadcaster Evan Davis and leading Christian groups.

Grayling apologised on 9 April, saying "I am sorry if what I said gave the wrong impression, I certainly didn't intend to offend anyone... I voted for gay rights, I voted for this particular measure." Various commentators speculated that he might have been "hidden away" by his party when he made relatively few public appearances in the days of the general election campaign that followed. It is unclear whether his remarks were the reason that David Cameron chose to appoint Theresa May as Home Secretary in his new Cabinet, rather than Grayling who held the position in the Shadow Cabinet; Grayling was not given any Cabinet post, as had been predicted by some media commentators prior to the election.

On 31 January 2013, it was reported that Grayling would vote in favour of same-sex marriage in England and Wales.

Carol singing controversy

In December 2014, Grayling threatened not to attend the Mayor of Epsom's traditional carol singing in the Ashley Centre as the piano was to be played by Robert Leach, who has been adopted as the UKIP candidate to stand against him in the 2015 election.  In the end, Grayling did attend and Leach did play the piano.

Justice department security failure

In January 2015, data relating to 3 fatal police shootings including details of marksmen and the deceased's family were lost in the post by the Justice Department. According to the Guardian it was particularly embarrassing for Grayling as the Government was claiming it needed to access personal data to detail with terrorism and could keep it securely. The data included details of the Mark Duggan shooting incident which had triggered the 2011 England riots.

Personal life

In April 1987 Grayling married Susan Clare Dillistone in Surrey: they have a daughter (born December 1992), and a son (born August 1996).

Styles

	 Chris Grayling Esq (1962-2001)

	 Chris Grayling Esq MP (2005-2010)

	 The Rt Hon Chris Grayling MP (2010-)

Publications

	 The Bridgewater Heritage: The Story of Bridgewater Estates by Chris Grayling, 1983, Bridgewater Estates PLC

	 A Land Fit for Heroes: Life in England After the Great War by Christopher Grayling, 1985, Buchan & Enright ISBN 0-907675-68-9

	 Holt's: The Story of Joseph Holt by Christopher Grayling, 1985, Joseph Holt PLC

	 Just Another Star?: Anglo-American Relations Since 1945 by Christopher Grayling and Christopher Langdon, 1987, Virgin Books ISBN 0-245-54603-0

	 Insight Guide Waterways of Europe contribution by Chris Grayling, 1989, Apa Publications ISBN 0-88729-825-7


