
#Article: Mark Addy
#Type: regular article

Mark Addy Johnson (born 14 January 1964), known professionally as Mark Addy, is an English actor. He is known for portraying Detective Constable Gary Boyle in the British sitcom The Thin Blue Line, Dave in the film The Full Monty, father Bill Miller in the American sitcom Still Standing, King Robert Baratheon in the HBO medieval fantasy series Game of Thrones, Fred Flintstone in The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas, and Hercules in the British fantasy drama series Atlantis.

Early life

Addy was born in the Tang Hall area of York, Yorkshire, and was educated in the city. His ancestors have lived in York since at least 1910, when his great-grandfather was living there. His father Ian spent his working life as a glazier at York Minster. From 1982 to 1984, Addy attended the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. 

Career

Addy made his first TV appearance in 1987 in The Ritz, followed in 1988 by A Very Peculiar Practice, followed by TV performances in shows such as Heartbeat, Band of Gold, Married... with Children, Peak Practice, The Thin Blue Line, Too Much Sun, Sunnyside Farm, Trollied and most recently The Syndicate for the BBC.

He played Bill Miller in Still Standing and played Detective Boyle in the second series of the British sitcom The Thin Blue Line. He also appeared on ITV1's comedy drama series Bonkers, and another ITV comedy drama, Bike Squad, in early 2008 as Sergeant John Rook. 

Since 2009, Addy has starred with Fay Ripley in a series of adverts for the relaunched Tesco Clubcard. He played Robert Baratheon in the HBO series Game of Thrones. He played Hercules, one of the main characters in the BBC One fantasy drama series Atlantis, which started airing on 28 September 2013 in the UK.

Addy had a leading role in the film The Full Monty, and played Fred Flintstone in the 2000 film The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas. In that role, as well as in Still Standing, he played a blue-collar American (or, more accurately, an American-accented Pangean in the case of Fred Flintstone). He played Mac McArthur in the 1998 film Jack Frost. In 2001, he played a butler to Chris Rock's character in the film Down to Earth and Roland in A Knight's Tale.

Addy played David Philby in The Time Machine and made an appearance as the Ship Captain in Around the World in 80 Days with Jackie Chan and Steve Coogan and made an appearance as Friar Tuck in Ridley Scott's 2010 film Robin Hood.

Personal life

Addy married his wife, Kelly, in 1996. They live in Market Weighton, Yorkshire with their three children: Ruby (born 2000), Charlie (born 2003), and Oscar (born 2004).

Filmography

Film

Television

Stage

Addy played Kevin Snell in the 2006 revival of Donkeys' Years at the Comedy Theatre in London, and in 2007-08 he has appeared at the National Theatre as Dogberry in Much Ado About Nothing and as Hjalmar Johansen in Fram. In 2011, he played Vladimir, an NKVD officer, in Collaborators at the National Theatre, which also featured in the National Theatre Live programme, where live performances are broadcast to cinemas around the world.


