
#Article: Rob Bartlett
#Type: regular article

Robert James Bartlett (born May 18, 1957) is an American "comedian", actor, stand up "comedian", impressionist, writer and actor, who gained widespread fame on the radio show Imus in the Morning.

Imus in the Morning

Bartlett has been appearing on the "Imus" show, beginning on New York City's WFAN-AM (660) radio, since the late 1980s, and now on WABC-AM (770) radio. His earlier characters included Arnold Schwarzenegger, Manuel Antonio Noriega, and fictional Japanese comedian "Buddy" Miyagi. In the years on the show, some of his characters included: The Godfather, Andrew Dice Clay, Dr. Phil McGraw, Rush Limbaugh, Paula Deen, Larry King, Bill Clinton, Gary Busey, Hulk Hogan, Brian Wilson (of the Beach Boys) and, most recently, Publisher Larry Flynt. Not all of his characters consist of celebrity caricatures. One long-running recurring character is named Blind Mississippi White Boy Pig Feets Dupris, an old blues musician from Louisiana. "Feets" employs a harmonica to accompany his vocals on the "Imus" show. He often takes credit for writing songs or for having instituted, decades ago, innovations in American popular music that have been widely attributed to other artists. His first character on the show was 'Sal Monella', a Brooklyn 'Gavonne', whose 'Night Before Christmas in Brooklyn' poem, has become a holiday tradition for the past 25 years.

Bartlett writes all the material he performs on the Imus show. 

Career

Bartlett started in stand-up comedy at Richard M. Dixon's White House Inn, a talent showcase club on Long Island. While working there, he met Eddie Murphy, and together formed two-thirds of the improvisational trio The Identical Triplets. After the two separated, he worked at the Sands Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, Tropicana Casino & Resort Atlantic City, Mohegan Sun and Foxwoods Resort Casino. He also appeared as a stand up comedian on the MTV Half Hour Comedy Hour, Standup Spotlight on VH1 and on Late Night with David Letterman and Conan O'Brien. For a brief stint in 1993, Bartlett was one of the three original hosts of the World Wrestling Federation's Monday Night Raw, along with Randy 'Macho Man' Savage, and Vince McMahon. His final appearance on the professional wrestling program was April 19, 1993.

He is also an accomplished stage actor. He made his Broadway debut in More to Love, which he wrote and starred in, with Dana Reeve and Joyce Van Patten. In 1999 he starred in Tabletop, for which he received a Drama Desk Award. His Broadway roles include Amos Hart in Chicago the Musical, Herman in Sweet Charity with Christina Applegate, originated the role of Mr. Mushnik in the Broadway production of Little Shop of Horrors,Speed in the Nathan Lane/Matthew Broderick revival of Neil Simon's The Odd Couple and played Twimble/Womper in the 2011 revival of 'How To Succeed in Business Without Really Trying" alongside Daniel Radcliffe.

On Network Television, Bartlett had a recurring role as Defense Attorney Milton Schoenfeld on Law & Order SVU, where, among his clients were Margo Kidder and Henry Winkler. He also played 'Troy the Security Guard' in the series 'Ugly Betty. He wrote and starred in the Public Television special, Rob Bartlett's Not For Profit T.V. Special, produced by Connecticut Public Television (CPTV), and was nominated for five Emmy Awards and won for Best Writing and Best Entertainment Program.

He was the voice of Marty the Dog in the hit animated children's show Kenny the Shark. His film roles include Table One, Spin the Bottle, and voiced Boss Baker Bunny in the animated film "The Easter Egg Adventure" 

In 2011, Bartlett returned to Broadway in the revival of How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying, playing the roles of Twimble and Wally Womper.

Bartlett continues to make appearances in venues throughout the Northeastern United States.

Personal

Bartlett was born May 18, 1957, in Brooklyn, New York). He lives on Long Island with his wife Sharon and their four sons.


