
#Article: Ross Bagdasarian, Jr.
#Type: regular article

Ross Dickran Bagdasarian (born October 25, 1949) is an American filmmaker best know for his work on the Alvin and the Chipmunks franchise; he is the son of the franchise's creator, Ross Bagdasarian, Sr.

Early life

Ross, Jr. was born in Fresno, California, the son of Armenuhi (née Kulhanjian) and Ross Bagdasarian, Sr. He is of Armenian descent. As a child, Ross, Jr. worked with his father on The Alvin Show by helping edit and coordinate the soundtracks and falsetto voice-overs of The Chipmunks.

Career

Bagdasarian went to law school but after his father's death in 1972, succeeded him as the President of Bagdasarian Productions, which had fallen into obscurity after significant success between 1958 and the late 1960s. His wife Janice Karman, whom he married in 1979, is co-president. Bagdasarian and Karman have two children and live in Montecito, California.

Under Ross, Jr.'s supervision, new Chipmunks records were created shortly after his marriage to Karman, including Chipmunk Punk. In 1981, the Chipmunks returned to television in the cartoon special A Chipmunk Christmas. Three years later, Ruby-Spears Productions' Alvin and the Chipmunks Saturday morning cartoon series debuted on NBC. Based on that series, a feature film, The Chipmunk Adventure was released in 1987. Ross, Jr. voices Alvin, Simon, and Dave Seville, and Karman voices Theodore and The Chipettes (Brittany, Jeanette, and Eleanor).

Ross, Jr. and Karman hold tight creative and financial control over the Chipmunk franchise, reviewing each and every business contract in great detail. In the mid-90s, Ross, Jr. bought the Chipmunk rights from brother Adam and a sister (a stay-at-home mother), to take complete control.

Universal Pictures lawsuit

Ross, Jr. licensed the rights to the Chipmunk characters to Universal Pictures in 1996, resulting in a string of Universal-produced direct-to-video films. Four years later, he and Karman sued them for breach of contract, claiming that Universal failed to properly utilize, market, and merchandise the characters and hence resulting in a loss of royalties to Ross, Jr. The case was decided in Ross, Jr.'s favor. "For us, it was a custody battle", Karman said. "They finally realized 'OK, these two are really fighting for their kids'."

Filmography

Film

Television


