
#Article: Mona Sutphen
#Type: regular article

Mona K. Sutphen (born November 10, 1967) served as the White House Deputy Chief of Staff for Policy in the Obama administration from 2009 to 2011. She is currently a Partner at Macro Advisory Partners LLP and from 2011-2013 was Managing Director at UBS AG, covering geopolitical risk, macro-policy trends and their impact on the global economy. She has also previously held positions as an American diplomat and served on the National Security Council during the Clinton Administration. She has also been a consultant and is the co-author of The Next American Century: How the U.S. Can Thrive as Other Powers Rise.

Background

Sutphen is from Milwaukee, Wisconsin and graduated from John Marshall High School there. Her mother was Jewish and her father African American.

She earned her B.A. in international relations in 1989 from Mount Holyoke College and an M.Sc. from the London School of Economics.

From 2001-2008 Sutphen was managing director of Stonebridge International, a Washington-based business strategy consulting firm that works with multinational corporations, financial institutions and other organizations on challenges worldwide. She also served as Vice President for Currenex, the first internet-based trading platform for the institutional foreign exchange market.

She has served as a United States Foreign Service officer (1991-2000), serving in the Clinton Administration on the staff of the National Security Council (1998-2000)., She also worked in the State Department's Human Rights bureau, and at the U.S. Embassy in Bangkok.

She is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and is on the board of the International Rescue Committee. She is an adjunct professor at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs and is the co-author (with Nina Hachigian) of The Next American Century: How the U.S. Can Thrive as Other Powers Rise.

Sutphen was "one of more than 50 ex-lobbyists in senior Obama administration jobs." The Washington Post published a profile of Sutphen on April 14, 2009.  She was also identified as one of the "seven behind-the-scenes economic players you need to know in the Obama administration" in the magazine Condé Nast Portfolio.

Personal life

She is married to Clyde Williams, who has served as President Bill Clinton's domestic policy adviser at his Foundation, a vice president of Center for American Progress, and the Democratic National Committee's political director. They married in 2001 and together they have two young children.

Works

Hachigian, Nina and Sutphen, Mona. The Next American Century: How the U.S. Can Thrive as Other Powers Rise, Simon & Schuster (January 8, 2008) ISBN 978-0-7432-9099-9


