
#Article: Sumir Karayi
#Type: regular article

Sumir Karayi (February 7, 1970), is the CEO of 1E, a company he founded in 1997. Sumir has since been at the forefront of the Green IT movement, pioneering PC power management and establishing a market-leading role. 1E's primary goal is to drive down the cost of IT for large organizations by identifying and eliminating waste and create efficiencies in IT, a process known as Software Lifecycle Automation.

Sumir is a member of the International Board of the Alliance to Save Energy and the British Association for Adoption and Fostering.

Early life

 Sumir was born in the Indian city of Jabalpur and did his schooling in city of Mussoorie with his two sisters Seema and Suman. At the age of 14 the family moved to Britain. 

Sumir attended grade school in Beckenham, Kent. He read engineering at Warwick University. Sumir was sponsored through his degree by a telecoms company, Standard Telephones and Cables (STC).

Sumir stayed on at Warwick to complete a Masters degree in information technology for manufacturing. Upon graduation he took a job with a computing firm in Oxford. 

Sumir spent the next few years working for the BBC, Reuters and Lombard. In 1997, at the age of 27, he became a technical expert at Microsoft. 

During his tenure at Microsoft, Sumir persuaded two of his co-workers to join him, each investing £500 to start up 1E, which was run in the spare room of his flat in West London. 

In 1999, Sumir developed the first iteration of NightWatchman Enterprise, 1E's flagship product. NightWatchman Enterprise's initial application was simply to safely power manage computers while still keeping them available for work and systems management.

Career

1992-1993 - Engineer, BBC: Novell and Windows deployment and management.

1993-1994 - Consultant, Reuters: Member of the projects/architecture team which implemented a standarised Windows desktop and Novell server environment. 

1994-1996 - Consultant, Lombard: Member of the architecture team which implemented a standardised Windows and SMS environment in Lombard North Central and subsidiary companies. 

1996-1997 - Engineer, Microsoft UK: External consultant, helped provide Premier support to the largest Microsoft UK customers. Specialised in SMS and Windows server.

1997- Present - CEO, 1E Ltd: Under Sumir’s leadership, 1E has become a successful, global organization. 1E remains privately held and is headquartered in London and New York and with 14 million licenses deployed world-wide and has helped organizations save in excess of $530m in energy costs, cutting CO2 emissions by 4.3 million tons. In 2010, 1E, was listed among the Sunday Times International Track 100 league table of top private companies, was heralded as one of the top 20 companies for CIO’s to watch by CIO magazine, awarded Best Green IT Supplier at the Green IT Expo, and is the Microsoft 2010 Software Solutions Innovation Partner of the Year for NightWatchman Server Edition. NightWatchman Server Edition won Product of the Year in the Green IT 2011 awards and NightWatchman Enterprise was named runner-up in the Minister of Energy Category.

Sumir is a founding member of EU-ASE which was established at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in December 2010. Its mission is to make the case for an urgent need for stronger action on energy efficiency in Europe. Members are CEOs from some of Europe’s most prominent companies, such as Siemens, Danfoss, Knauf Insulation, 1E and Schneider Electric, senior European politicians, foundations and campaigners.

Social Awareness

Sumir believes that education is the most important factor in helping under-privileged children break the cycle of poverty in the West as well as in his country of birth, India.

He is actively involved with the British Association for Adoption and Fostering and has sponsored research and education programs to ensure fostering carers have the necessary skills to look after the children in their care by improving the quality of their educational support.

Sumir is a patron of the Manav Mandir Ashram Orphanage in Delhi, and supports the education of the children there.

He is a supporter of the Masoom Duniya school for physically and mentally challenged children run by the Innocent World Charitable Society, and provides specialist speech therapists and trainers.


