
#Article: Silda Wall Spitzer
#Type: regular article

Silda Alice Wall (born December 30, 1957) is an American businesswoman, lawyer, and former First Lady of New York State. According to a Vogue article, she has worked in the private, nonprofit and public sectors as she has sought to advance the New York economy and promote progress on green/sustainability issues, youth service/education, and human rights and women's financial and other empowerment. Currently, she is Principal at NewWorld Capital Group, a private equity firm investing in environmental opportunities, including energy efficiency, clean energy, water, waste-to-value and environmental services. She is also Co-Founder and CEO of woman-owned New York States of Mind LLC, a digital magazine and marketplace that creates a new intellectual and economic platform for the people, places, products and ideas in New York State.

She is the ex-wife of former New York Governor Eliot Spitzer and was the First Lady of New York State from January 2007 until March 2008.

Early life

Wall Spitzer grew up in Concord, North Carolina. Her father, Robert, was a hospital administrator, and her mother, Trilby, was a homemaker. She was raised as a Southern Baptist. Wall Spitzer graduated in 1980 with a B.A., summa cum laude, from Meredith College, and was awarded an Honorary Doctorate in 2011. She received a Juris Doctor from Harvard Law School in 1984.

Personal life

She married Eliot Spitzer on October 17, 1987 and they have three daughters: Elyssa, Sarabeth, and Jenna. At the close of 2013 Spitzer and his wife announced the end of their marriage.  Spitzer is reported to have had a romantic affair with Lis Smith, a 31-year-old spokesperson for then New York City Mayor-elect Bill de Blasio. She had been Spitzer's spokesperson during his 2013 run for comptroller.

Career

Currently, she is Principal at NewWorld Capital Group, a private equity firm investing in environmental opportunities, including energy efficiency, clean energy, water, waste-to-value and environmental services. She is also Co-Founder and CEO of woman-owned New York States of Mind LLC, a digital magazine and marketplace that creates a new intellectual and economic platform for the people, places, products and ideas in New York State.

She began her legal career with Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, specializing in mergers, acquisitions and corporate finance. She then joined The Chase Manhattan Bank, N.A. as a member of its International Legal Group. She is a founding co-chair of Project Cicero, the annual New York City book drive which builds classroom libraries in under-resourced schools. She served on the NY Blue Ribbon Commission on Youth Leadership as well as the board of the Children's Museum of Manhattan from 1995 until January 1999, where she was a member of its executive committee and chaired its program committee. In 1996, she co-founded Children for Children, a not-for-profit organization, to engage children from an early age in volunteering and service—helping them develop leadership, critical thinking, problem-solving and social/emotional skillsets to become civically, community and philanthropically involved adults promoting community involvement and civic engagement. She served as its President and Chair until 2007. CFC has become the youth service division of Points of Light, and is now called generationOn. As the wife of former New York Governor Eliot Spitzer, she was the First Lady of New York State from January 2007 until March 2008. From 2008-2011, she was Managing Director at Metropolitan Capital Advisors, a woman-owned hedge fund.

Among her not-for-profit activities, she serves as Vice-Chair of Urban Green Council and serves on the boards of Points of Light and generationOn, her alma mater Meredith College, and the Center for Law, Brain and Behavior.


