
#Article: Tammam Salam
#Type: regular article

Tammam Saeb Salam (تمّام صائب سلام; born 13 May 1945) is a Lebanese politician who has been Prime Minister of Lebanon since February 2014 and the acting President of Lebanon since May 2014. He previously served in the government of Lebanon as Minister of Culture from 2008 to 2009.

Salam was tasked with forming a new government on 6 April 2013. He was one of the independent Sunni politicians. He is close to the March 14 Alliance, and still has good relations with the March 8 Alliance. Salam was elected Prime Minister on 15 February 2014.

Early life and education

Salam was born into a prominent Sunni family in Beirut on 13 May 1945. He comes from a politically powerful family in Lebanon. He is the eldest son of the former Lebanese prime minister Saeb Salam, who held the office several times since independence. His mother, Tamima Mardam Beik, is of Syrian origin and hails from Damascus. His grandfather, Salim Ali Salam, was one of the Lebanese officials who served during the Ottoman era and French era. More specifically, he served as a Beirut deputy in the Ottoman parliament and was also the head of the Beirut municipality. Tammam Salam has two older sisters and two younger brothers.

Tammam Salam is a graduate of Broummana High School and Haigazian University in Beirut. He also holds an economics and management degree, which he received in England.

Early careers

Salam began his career as a businessman after graduation. He joined the political field at the beginning of the 1970s. He established the Pioneers of Reform Movement (حركة روّاد الإصلاح) in 1973. The objective of the movement was to follow a moderate policy in the middle of the turmoil in the country. On the other hand, the movement was also regarded as the private militia group of Salam's father, Saeb Salam. However, the movement was dissolved by Tammam Salam at the initial phase of the Lebanese civil war in order to avoid being part of the militant activities.

In 1978, he joined the Makassed foundation, a non-profit charity organization in Beirut as a board member. He became the president of the foundation in 1982. The leadership of the foundation was passed through generations in the Salam family. Tammam Salam resigned as president of the Foundation in September 2000. He is currently the honorary president of the Foundation. Later, he also became the head of the Saeb Salam Foundation for culture and higher education.

Later politics

In the general elections of 1992, Salam was a candidate, but later he withdrew his candidacy as a protest over the Syrian dominance in Lebanon. His boycott aimed at supporting the Lebanese Christians in an attempt to preserve the sectarian balance in the country. Salam was first elected to the parliament in the 1996 elections from Beirut as an independent candidate. However Salam lost his seat in the general elections held in 2000. He did not run for office in the 2005 general elections.

He was appointed minister of culture in the cabinet led by Prime Minister Fouad Siniora on 11 July 2008. Salam also won his seat in the general elections held in 2009. He entered an electoral alliance with Saad Hariri and became part of his list in Beirut's third district. Salam is an independent member of the Lebanese parliament. In addition, he is part of the Lebanon First bloc in the parliament, but not a member of any political party, making him a centrist figure.

30 September 2015 - President Tammam Salam addressed the United Nations General Assembly during general debates, attended other events both within the UN and beyond, met with various world leaders.

Premiership

Following the resignation of Najib Mikati as prime minister on 23 March 2013, Salam was designated as a consensus Prime Minister. The 14 March Alliance officially nominated Salam as Prime Minister. Salam was tasked with forming a government on 6 April 2013 after garnering 124 votes out of 128 parliament members. On 15 February 2014, he announced the formation of a new government of 24 ministers.

Views

Following the assassination of Rafik Hariri on 14 February 2005, Salam said "Playing with emotions is a very dangerous game in Lebanon, a game which Hariri himself never subscribed to." referring to mass demonstrations blaming Syria for the assassination in the country.

Personal life

Salam is married to Lama Badreddine and has three children from a previous marriage.


