
#Article: S. S. Rajamouli
#Type: regular article

S. S. Rajamouli (born Koduri Srisaila Sri Rajamouli) is an Indian film director, and screenwriter known for his works exclusively in Telugu cinema. He is known for directing blockbuster films Magadheera (2009), Eega (2012) and Baahubali (2015). His notable films include the sports drama film Sye, the social problem and masala film, Vikramarkudu, which was screened at the International Film Festival of India in the mainstream section. The melodrama films Maryada Ramanna, Vikramarkudu and Chhatrapati were remade in various Indian languages, with successful reviews. He has garnered the Star World India, "Entertainer of The Year", and the National Film Award in 2012.

Career

Mainstream

Rajamouli started directing Telugu soap operas on Eenadu Television, under the guidance of K. Raghavendra Rao. His first shot at Telugu films was Student No.1 with Jr. NTR which was a big hit in 2001. It took two long years for Rajamouli to come up with his second movie and delivered a blockbuster with his second movie Simhadri. In the two-year gap between Student No.1 and Simhadri, Rajamouli planned his first mythological film with Malayalam superstar Mohanlal, but the film eventually got shelved. In 2015, Assistant art director Manu Jagath, who later worked as the art director for Baahubali, released several sketches he had drawn for the shelved Mohanlal project. Rajamouli's third movie was Sye. It was a first-of-its-kind movie in Tollywood, in that it was based on a rugby game. This movie was also the first instance where Rajamouli collaborated with K. K. Senthil Kumar. With his next flick Chatrapathi, Rajamouli again evoked emotions with the audience. The music of M. M. Keeravani and cinematography by Senthil Kumar added to the film's success.

In his next stint Vikramarkudu, Rajamouli worked with Raviteja. The movie was a big success and was remade into Hindi as Rowdy Rathore by Prabhu Deva with Akshay kumar in the lead, into Tamil as Siruthai, and in Kannada as Veera Madakari by ace actor Sudeep. He then directed Yamadonga, a socio-fantasy film praised by critics. Next was the biggest film in Telugu Cinema at the time, Magadheera starring Ram charan Teja, Magadheera became one of the biggest commercial successes in Telugu Cinema. He won the Nandi Award for Best Director and Filmfare Award for Best Director - Telugu for the film. This film also won the National Film Award for Best Choreography. His comedy thriller film Maryada Ramanna (2010) was remade in Hindi as "Son of Sardar". In one of the popular MAA TV shows, Mee Star, Rajamouli said Maryada Ramanna is his personal favorite movie among all the movies he has directed.

International acclaim

Rajamoulis 2012 experimental fantasy film, Eega was screened to critical acclaim at LÉtrange Film Festival. The Tamil version Naan Ee was screened at the 10th Chennai International Film Festival. The Telugu version has also garnered awards for the Most Original Film, Best Special Effects, Best Comedy, Best Fights, Best Film to Watch with a Crowd, Best Editing, Best Villain and Best Hero at the 8th annual Toronto After Dark Film Festival.

The Telugu version was also screened the 2013 Cannes Film Festival, the Panorama section of the 16th Shanghai International Film Festival, and Puchon International Fantastic Film Festival. The film has received Best art direction award at the Fantaspoa film festival of Brazil. Also it is nominated for six awards including Best film, Best Cinematographer, Best Special effects, Best Music Composer, Best Editor and Best supporting Actor for the Madrid International Film Festival.

In 2015, he directed Baahubali: The Beginning, which became the third Global highest grossing Indian film of all time, and the highest grossing Indian film of all time within India. The making of the epic film was featured in BBCs documentary on 100 Years of Indian cinema directed by Sanjeev Bhaskar. The film was shot using Arri Alexa XT camera marking Rajamoulis first film using digital camera. Rajamoulis work was cited by The Hollywood Reporter, The Guardian, and The Huffington Post.

Personal life

Rajamouli was born to Telugu film screenwriter and director, K. V. Vijayendra Prasad. He was born in Raichur, Karnataka. He holds engineering degree from C. R. R. College of Engineering, Eluru.

Awards

	National Film Awards

	National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Telugu (director) - Eega (2012)

	Nandi Awards

	Nandi Award for Best Director - Magadheera (2009)

	Filmfare Awards South

	Filmfare Award for Best Director - Telugu - Magadheera (2009)

	Filmfare Award for Best Director - Telugu - Eega (2012)

	CineMAA Awards

	CineMAA Award for Best Director - Magadheera (2009)

	Other Honours

	Star World India - The Front Row With Anupama Chopra - "Entertainer of The Year 2012" for Makkhi

Filmography

As Director

As Actor

As producer


