
#Article: Abhishek Singhvi
#Type: regular article

Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi (born 24 February 1959) is an Indian politician belonging to Indian National Congress party, he is also a Member of the Parliament of India representing Rajasthan in the Lok Sabha, the Lower House of the Indian Parliament. He was formerly the spokesperson of the Congress party.

Early life and education

Abhishek Singhvi was born in Jodhpur, Rajasthan to Kamla and Laxmi Mall Singhvi, a renowned lawyer and India's former High Commissioner to the UK, who belonged to Bharatiya Janta Party but now with Indian National Congress.

He completed his St. Columba's School. He obtained B.A.(Hons.), M.A., Ph.D., PIL educated at St. Stephen's College, Trinity College, Cambridge and Harvard University . Singhvi completed his Ph.D. under constitutional lawyer Sir William Wade of Cambridge University. The topic of his doctoral dissertation at Cambridge University was on Emergency Powers.

Family and personal life

Abhishek Singhvi is married to ghazal and Sufi singer Anita Singhvi. They have two sons, Anubhav (born 1st Dec 1984) and Avishkar (born 12th Oct 1987).

Abhishek was born on 24 February 1959 in Jaipur, Rajasthan. His father Dr. Laxmi Mall Singhvi was a renowned lawyer and India's former High Commissioner to the UK. He was elected to Rajya Sabha (1998-2004) as a member of the Bhartiya Janta Party. His mother’s name is Kamla Singhvi.

The MPs who have declared the highest remuneration-cumulative of directorship, regular remunerated activity and professional engagement-include Abhishek Manu Singhvi, who tops the chart at Rs 50 crore per annum.

Positions Held

1997-98 Additional Solicitor General of India 2001 onwards National Spokesperson, Indian National Congress April 2006 Elected to Rajya Sabha Aug. 2006 - May 2009 and Aug. 2009-July 2011 Member, Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice Aug. 2006 - Aug. 2007 Member, Joint Committee on Offices of Profit Member, Joint Committee to examine the Constitutional and Legal position relating to Office of Profit Member, Consultative Committee for the Ministry of Urban Development Sept. 2006 - Sept. 2010 Member, Committee of Privileges July 2010 onwards Member, Consultative Committee for the Ministry of External Affairs July 2011 onwards Chairman, Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice Member, General Purposes Committee 

Achievements

He was awarded and acknowledged by the Global Leader of Tomorrow Award in 1999. He was invited to hold lectures on Federalism in 2007, with that lecture being printed in the IIPA journal apart from the best essay.

Controversies

A tape allegedly involving Dr. Singhvi with another women in a compromising positions were circulated. Following this he resigned from Congress and as a Rajya Sabha member. However, Dr. Singhvi rubbished the tape as concocted and manipulated. 


