
#Article: Néstor de Villa
#Type: regular article

Gines Francisco Soriano (July 6, 1928  -  February 21, 2004), also known as Néstor de Villa, was a Filipino actor frequently cast in musical films. He was a gifted dancer, often paired with frequent on-screen partner Nida Blanca in both movies and television. His dancing talent led some people to call him the "Fred Astaire of the Philippines", though the same moniker had also been given to Bayani Casimiro.

Early life and later career

De Villa was born Gines Francisco Soriano on July 6, 1928 in Cabanatuan City in the province of Nueva Ecija. He was a pre-medical student when he was signed by LVN Pictures. His father was disappointed by his decision to become an actor, and the two became estranged. However, they were reconciled by LVN President Doña Sisang de Leon, who arranged to have de Villa's father secretly attend one of his movie premieres.

He made his first movie with LVN, Amor-Mio (My Love), in 1951. The following year, he teamed up with another LVN contract star, Nida Blanca, for Romansa sa Nayon. The film's success popularized the Nestor-Nida "love team", though in real-life, de Villa would marry Marilu Cacho Soriano.

He remained at LVN until 1961, when the studio discontinued making films. He then transferred to Sampaguita Pictures where in 1962 he made his Sampaguita debut in Tugtuging Bukid (Farm Music), together with Gloria Romero. In the 1960s, he was nominated three times for the FAMAS Best Actor award—for Mga Yapak ng Walang Bakas (1962); Naku Yabang (1964); and Siete Dolores (1968). De Villa and Blanca also appeared together on an ABS-CBN television show, The Nida-Nestor Show.

In the 1980s, de Villa made his screen comeback when he was again paired with Blanca in two movies for Viva Films: Forgive and Forget, which also starred Sharon Cuneta and William Martinez, and Saan Darating Ang Umaga (Where Will the Morning Come), a family drama co-starring Maricel Soriano and Jaypee de Guzmán.

He was posthimously inducted to the Philippines Eastwood City Walk Of Fame in December 2005.

Personal life

He was married to Marilu Cacho, his three sons and in-laws, Jeric and Marissa, Gicky and Malu, Joby and Cindy, and only daughter Karel and husband Toti. His grandson Paul Soriano is also TV and commercial director.

Filmography

Movies

TV shows

Death

De Villa remained active in films until his death of complications arising from hepatobiliary cancer on February 21, 2004.


