
#Article: Marianna Vardinoyannis
#Type: regular article

Marianna Vardinoyannis (Μαριάννα Βαρδινογιάννη, née Μπουρνάκη Bournaki) married to Greek shipping magnate Vardis Vardinogiannis, is an UNESCO ambassador and an active personality in both regional and international level that fights for the rights of children and the family, and she is known for her combats against the sexual abuse of children, via the Foundation for the Child and the Family which was created by her. Also, Marianna Vardinoyannis, in recognition of her contribution and her efforts to create a Europe of Citizens, was distinguished as Woman of Europe.She has been the President of the Elpida (Hope) Association of friends of children with cancer.

Early life, education and family

Marianna Vardinoyannis was born in Greece and raised in Athens. She studied Economics at the Denver University of Colorado after her graduation from a high school in Athens. She is married to Vardis Vardinogiannis and they have 5 children.

International and regional activities

Marianna Vardinoyannis, begun her actions as a member in various organizations, associations and beneficiary institutes, from where she fought for the international peace and global solidarity, although her primary focus was on the problems most of the children of the world deal with: the children's health, the education, social welfare and against poverty, children's abuse and exploitation.

She has developed strong relationships with several international personalities, such as Queen Rania of Jordan, Suzanne Mubarak, several networks, co-operations and organizations like Global Coalition Women Defending Peace focusing on the establishment of a culture of peace in the world.

In 2013 Marianna Vardinoyannis joined the Nizami Ganjavi International Center Board along with Ismail Serageldin, Vaira Vike-Freiberga, Tarja Halonen, Suleyman Demirel, Roza Otunbayeva, Ambassador Walter Fust and Federico Mayor Zaragoza. It is a cultural, non-profit, non-political organization dedicated to the memory of Azerbaijani poet, Nizami Ganjavi, the study and dissemination of his works, the promotion of the principles embodied in his writings, the advancement of culture and creative expression, and the promotion of learning, dialogue, tolerance and understanding between cultures and people.

The first Children's Oncology Hospital

On 14 October 2010, the Elpida (Hope) Children's Oncology Hospital which is among the first hospitals of its kind to be built in Europe (located in Athens, Greece), was inaugurated and opened to the public.

Elpida which is Marianna Vardinoyannis' lifetime goal, focuses on the care of children with cancer.It is equipped with the most highly advanced technological medical equipments used for cancer treatment, which is available in the world nowadays.

Awards and Honors

	 Légion d'Honneur. Title conferred in 2006 by the French Republic.

	 Golden Cross of the Order of Benefaction by the Hellenic Republic

See also

	 Vardinogiannis Foundation


