
#Article: Balthazar Getty
#Type: regular article

Paul Balthazar Getty (; born January 22, 1975) is an American actor, member of the band Ringside, the producer-half of rap duo The Wow, and a member of the Getty family. He is known for the roles of Thomas Grace on the American action drama Alias and Tommy Walker on the American drama Brothers & Sisters, both which have aired on ABC.

Early life

Paul Balthazar Getty was born in Tarzana, California, and raised in San Francisco before being educated in the United Kingdom at the Gordonstoun School, a boarding school that has educated three generations of the British Royal Family. His great-grandfather was Jean Paul Getty, founder of the Getty Oil Company, and at one time one of the richest men in the world. His grandfather was Sir Paul Getty; his father was John Paul Getty III. His mother, Gisela (née Schmidt), is a professional photographer and documentary filmmaker. His parents divorced in 1993. He has a maternal half-sister, Anna (born 1972).

Career

Getty began his acting career at age 14 in 1989. He auditioned for the lead role in the movie Lord of the Flies after being spotted by a casting director, Robin Joy Allan, in his art class at school. During the 1990s and early 2000s, he appeared in the films Young Guns II, Natural Born Killers, Judge Dredd, Mr. Holland's Opus, White Squall, Lost Highway, Big City Blues, The Center of the World, Deuces Wild, Ladder 49, Feast, and the television miniseries Traffic. 

Getty guest-starred on the television series Charmed as Richard Montana, a male witch romantically linked with Paige Matthews. He appeared in the fifth season of the hit show Alias as Agent Thomas Grace. He starred, alongside Alias costar Ron Rifkin, in the ABC prime time drama Brothers & Sisters, which first aired in September 2006. Getty played the role of Thomas "Tommy" Walker, third-born of the five Walker siblings.

In late 2008, media reports indicated Getty's contract as a full-time series regular in Brothers & Sisters would not be renewed due, in part, to budgetary and storyline considerations. In the Season 4 premiere, Getty was still listed in the principal cast, but he did not appear. Getty made his return to the series in the sixth episode of Season 4. Although he no longer appeared in every episode, he continued to make appearances on the show until its cancellation.

Personal life

In 2000, Getty married fashion designer Rosetta Millington. They have three daughters: Grace, Violet, and June Catherine, and a son, Cassius Paul. He had a well-publicized affair with English actress Sienna Miller but eventually returned to his wife.

Social initiatives

Getty is on the board of directors for The Lunchbox Fund, a non-profit organization providing daily meals to township school students in Soweto, South Africa.

Filmography

Awards and nominations


