
#Article: Aditya Mittal
#Type: regular article

Aditya Mittal, born in 1976, is a CFO, responsible for Flat Americas, Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A), Investor Relations, Strategy and Communications of the world's largest steel firm ArcelorMittal, which is controlled by his father Lakshmi Mittal, who was ranked 21st in the 2012 Forbes list of billionaires.

Education and career

Born and grown up in Indonesia, Aditya Mittal attended high school at Jakarta International School. He has a bachelor's degree in Economics with concentrations in Strategic Management and Corporate Finance from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in the United States, from which he graduated magna cum laude in 1996.

He worked for a short time in the mergers and acquisitions department at investment bank Credit Suisse First Boston. He joined the family business in 1997 and was appointed Head of Mergers and Acquisitions in 1999, and has been involved in several purchases since then as Mittal Steel has played a major role in the consolidation of the global steel industry. He lives in London. He led Mittal Steel's offer for Arcelor that led to its acquisition and merger with Mittal Steel in 2006. The two companies were merged in 2006, with the merged company being named ArcelorMittal.

In 2009, he was ranked 4th in Fortune Magazine's "40 under 40"  list.

Appointments

He is a member of the World Economic Forum's Young Global Leaders Forum, the Young President's Organization, a Board Member at the Wharton School, a Board Member at Bennett, Coleman & Co., a Board Member at PPR and a member of Citigroup's International Advisory

Charitable involvement

He is involved with various charitable organisations, including the NSPCC in the United Kingdom.

In 2008, Aditya and Megha Mittal made a donation of £15m to Great Ormond Street Hospital in London, the largest private contribution the hospital had ever received. The donation was used to help fund their new facility, the Mittal Children’s Medical Centre.

Personal life

Aditya Mittal is married to Megha Mittal, owner of German fashion company Escada. He has one sister, Vanisha, who is also a board member of ArcelorMittal.He has two daughters 


