
#Article: Jamie Eason
#Type: regular article

Jamie Eason (born April 10, 1976) is an American fitness model and writer. She is also a former NFL cheerleader and winner of the World's Fittest Model competition. She has been the featured subject and cover girl on many fitness and women's magazines. She is currently a full-time spokesperson for Bodybuilding.com, and is developing her own line of swimwear and recently launched her own supplement line with Labrada nutrition. Eason is known as representing healthy fitness and femininity. 

Early Life

Eason was born April 10, 1976 in Houston, Texas. She also has an older brother.

Career

Education

While working towards a degree in speech communication/organization at Texas A&M University, she took a weight training class for a kinesiology credit. It was then that her interest in fitness training began.

Early Career

In 2001, after graduating from college and while working for her grandfather's roofing company, she tried out for the new Houston Texans cheerleading squad. She was one of 35 girls selected from 1,600 girls in a rigorous two-day process.

After a short time as a Houston Texans cheerleader, she was diagnosed with breast cancer forcing her to a desk job where her inactive lifestyle and poor nutrition took a toll on her body.  In an attempt to get in shape, she joined a local gym. She continued to work out and improve but wasn't completely satisfied with her results. After consulting a nutritionist, she was put on a proper diet that completely transformed her body. 

Later Career

Eason was first discovered at a fitness competition in Austin, Texas. She received a pro card after her first fitness competition in 2006 at the Hardbody Entertainment Model Search at the Olympia.

As a spokesperson, Eason has been dubbed the "female face" of Bodybuilding.com, the world's largest and most-visited online retailer for sports supplements and nutritional products. Jamie also has authored several workout plans and routines that are followed by millions of people on bodybuilding.com. She has also focuses on removing the stereotype that women with muscle are unfeminine. Eason has stated that she regrets some of her earlier photo shoots that showed more skin when she began her career modeling. She continues fitness modeling but encourages young women in fitness and modeling not to show a lot of skin stating "It's not worth it." Her training style mostly revolves around weight training, she has stated she prefers that over cardio training, so she doesn't do cardio training a lot but heavily focuses on weight training.

Health through pregnancy has also been another topic of fitness Eason has discussed. In terms of losing baby weight in a healthy manner Eason stated: "First, create a plan. Have a workout plan ready to follow, and create a routine to prepare your meals just like you will for your baby. Second, breast feed. It's the best way to burn those excess calories and it's good for the baby. Third, take regular walks or jogs by yourself, with your baby, or with your partner. It's good to get fresh air; and every little bit of exercise will move you closer toward your goal."

Personal Life

Eason is a devout Christian.  Eason was diagnosed with breast cancer at 22 years old fighting off the disease, and at the age of 28 an injury revealed that she has Spina Bifida Occulta, a minor form of the disease that is quite debilitating during flare-ups.  She has stated her two main pursuits in life are her family and Jesus Christ. Eason met Michael Middleton in church and they began to date and after a year of dating he proposed to her on Christmas eve through a song he wrote for her. She married Michael Middleton, a fellow workout enthusiast and Worship Leader in their church, on July 18, 2012. Jamie gave birth to her son August in late 2013.


