
#Article: Jon Bernthal
#Type: regular article

Jonathan Edward "Jon" Bernthal (born September 20, 1976) is an American actor. He is known for his roles as Shane Walsh on the AMC television series The Walking Dead and as Joe Teague in the TNT series Mob City, as well as for his roles in films such as The Wolf of Wall Street (2013) and Fury (2014). He will portray Frank Castle / The Punisher in the second season of the Marvel Cinematic Universe Netflix series Daredevil, currently in production for a 2016 release.

Early life

Bernthal was born and raised in Washington, D.C. He is the son of Joan Lurie (née Marx) and Eric Lawrence "Rick" Bernthal, a lawyer with Latham & Watkins LLP. His paternal grandfather was musician and producer Murray Bernthal. He has two brothers, Nicholas and Thomas. His parents are both Jewish (his maternal grandfather was from Germany, while Jon's other ancestors emigrated from Austria, Lithuania, Poland, and Russia). He graduated from the Sidwell Friends School in Washington.

After high school, Bernthal studied at Skidmore College in Saratoga Springs, and later attended The School of Moscow Art Theatre in Russia. During his time there, he played catcher on a semi-professional baseball team. He was discovered by the executive director of Harvard University's Institute for Advanced Theater Training at the American Repertory Theatre in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and graduated in 2002 from the American Repertory Theatre with a Master of Fine Arts.

Career

Since 2002, Bernthal has performed in over 30 plays regionally and Off-Broadway, including many with his own award-winning theatre company, Fovea Floods. He also had small guest roles in television series like Boston Legal, CSI: Miami, How I Met Your Mother and many more.

Bernthal got his first regular role on a television series on the sitcom The Class, which was created by Friends co-creator David Crane. The show was cancelled after only one season. After this he had roles in other films such as World Trade Center and Day Zero.

In 2009, Bernthal had a supporting role in the Ben Stiller comedy film Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian as mobster Al Capone. The same year he became a series regular on the television series Eastwick, which was cancelled after only one season.

The following year, in 2010, Berthnal portrayed Sgt. Manuel Rodriguez on the HBO miniseries The Pacific.

Bernthal portrayed Shane Walsh in Frank Darabont's The Walking Dead, based on the comic book series of the same name. He was a regular on the show until 2012, when his character was killed off. He was nominated for the Breakout Performance - Male Award at the 2011 Scream Awards for his performance.

In 2013, he appeared in the crime drama film Snitch. Bernthal reunited with Frank Darabont for the TNT series Mob City, in which he portrays Joe Teague, a police officer working in a corrupt 1940s Los Angeles. He also had supporting roles in the Martin Scorsese directed film The Wolf of Wall Street and the sports comedy film Grudge Match.

He played southerner Grady "Coon-Ass" Travis in the 2014 World War II film Fury, opposite Brad Pitt, Shia LaBeouf, Logan Lerman and Michael Peña. Jon Bernthal appears as a playable character in the video game Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare in a downloadable game mode "Exo Zombies". Bernthal will star in the Irish action thriller film Pilgrimage, along with Tom Holland and Richard Armitage.

Marvel announced on June 9, 2015 that Bernthal will portray Frank Castle/The Punisher in season 2 of the Netflix series Daredevil, which will be released in 2016.

Personal life

Bernthal married Erin Angle, the niece of professional wrestler Kurt Angle, on September 25, 2010. They have two sons together, born in August 2011 and in February 2013; and a daughter, born February 2015. Bernthal is a cousin of Adam Schlesinger, bassist of the band Fountains of Wayne. Together with his brother Nicholas, an orthopaedic surgeon at UCLA, Bernthal runs a nonprofit organization called Drops Fill Buckets, described as an "impact-driven, entrepreneurial approach to making a difference".

Bernthal has claimed to have broken his nose 14 times.

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games

Theatre


