
#Article: Ram Kapoor
#Type: regular article

Ram Kapoor (; born 1 September 1973) is an Indian television actor. He portrayed Jai Walia in Kasamh Se, the character Ram Kapoor in Bade Achhe Lagte Hain, and hosted Rakhi Ka Swayamwar.

He won the Indian Telly Awards for best actor consecutively (in 2006, 2007 and 2008).

Early life and education

He spent his formative years at Sherwood College, Nainital. At Sherwood College, Kapoor was introduced to acting, when as a challenge and an order from his head captain he auditioned for the annual school theatrical production of Charley's Aunt and performed the lead role. Under the direction and tutelage of Amir Raza Hussein Kapoor found his career path and realised his love for acting. After completing his 10th board exams, Kapoor studied at the Kodaikanal International School. After his graduation, Kapoor decided to join the entertainment industry and left for Los Angeles in the United States with the intention of joining UCLA to study film making but joined a Stanislavski acting academy in Los Angeles.

Career

Kapoor made his on screen debut with the television serial Nyay (1997). He took up three more shows Heena (1998), Sangharsh (1999) in the same year he was offered a part in Kavita (2000).

In 2000 Kapoor acted in Ghar Ek Mandir. Kapoor worked with Amir Raza Hussein once again in the play The Fifty Days of War-Kargil which ran for 10 days in New Delhi as a tribute to the heroes of the Kargil War. Ram played five characters.

In 2001 Kapoor acted in Rishtey, in the serial Kabhi Aaye Na Judaai and a cameo appearance in Mira Nair's film Monsoon Wedding.

He appeared in Dhadkan (2003) and Awaz - Dil Se Dil Tak', followed Hazaaron Khwaishein Aisi with Bali (2004), a telefilm in which he played Prithvi Singh.In 2005 Kapoor's Hindi movies were Devaki, Kal: Yesterday and Tomorrow and Missed Call.Kapoor opted for Basera. Kapoor participated in two reality shows: Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa' as a participant'i and Rakhi Ka Swayamwar as a host.

Kapoor appeared in minor roles in two films in 2010. The first was the commercial Karthik Calling Karthik, with Kapoor playing the role of Kamath. The second, Udaan, was a Parallel Cinema directed by Vikrmaditya Motwane and under the banner of Anurag Kashyap.

In 2011, he starred in the show Bade Achhe Lagte Hain in the role of Ram Kapoor.

He appeared in Bollywood movies Agent Vinod (2012), Student Of The Year (2013) and Humshakals (2014).

Television

Fiction shows

Reality shows

Events

Films

Awards


