
#Article: Rajiv Pratap Rudy
#Type: regular article

Rajiv Pratap Rudy (born March 30, 1962) is an Indian politician, representing Bharatiya Janata Party, and a Member of Parliament representing Saran Lok Sabha constituency in Bihar, India since May 2014. In November 2014, he was made Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Skill Development and Entrepreneurship in Narendra Modi's government, a key ministry in view of Modi's slogan of 'Make in India' and associated attempts to make India a production hub. He also shares Parliamentary Affairs department jointly with another Minister of State, Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi. Rudy is a General Secretary of Bharatiya Janata Party, a position he will relinquish soon since he has joined the government. He also holds a commercial pilot's license.

Early life

Rajiv Rudy was a lecturer prior to entering politics, but he had been involved in student politics while at Punjab University Campus, Sector 14, Chandigarh and in Government College, Sector, 11, Chandigarh, which is affiliated to Punjab University, Chandigarh. He is from a Bihari Rajput family.

Political career

He was elected in 1990 as an Member of the Bihar Legislative Assembly. He was elected to the Lok Sabha - the lower house of the Parliament of India - as a candidate of the BJP. He was re-elected for a second term of Lok Sabha in 1999, from Bhartiya Janata Party. He served as the Minister of State for Commerce, Trade & Industry and subsequently became Civil Aviation Minister with independent charge in the National Democratic Alliance government led by Atal Bihari Vajpayee. Rudy had earlier held the post of National Vice President of the Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha. Currently, he is a General Secretary and member of the BJP National Executive.He was elected to Rajya Sabha from Bihar in 2010. He contested the 2014 Lok Sabha Elections from Saran constituency in Bihar and defeated former Chief Minister of Bihar, Rabri Devi.He was sworn-in as Minister of State on 9 November 2014 and got Minister of State (Independent Charge) of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship. 

Personal life

Rudy is married to Neelam Pratap and has two daughters.


