
#Article: Charlie Day
#Type: regular article

Charles Peckham "Charlie" Day (born February 9, 1976) is an American actor, musician, producer, comedian, and screenwriter. He is best known for playing Charlie Kelly on It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia, and for his roles in the films Horrible Bosses (2011), Monsters University (2013), Pacific Rim (2013), The Lego Movie (2014), and Horrible Bosses 2 (2014). He is due to start filming 'Fist Fight' alongside Ice Cube in December 2015. 

Early life

Day was born in New York City, New York. His mother, Mary (née Peckham), was a piano teacher at The Pennfield School in Portsmouth, Rhode Island. His father, Dr. Thomas Charles Day, is a retired professor of music history and music theory at Salve Regina University in Newport, Rhode Island. His father is of Italian and Irish descent, and his mother has English with remote Irish and Welsh ancestry. Day spent most of his childhood in Middletown, Rhode Island.

He attended Pennfield School and graduated from the Portsmouth Abbey School, both in Portsmouth, Rhode Island. Day starred on the baseball team at the Portsmouth Abbey School, playing shortstop for the Ravens. He received a bachelor's degree from Merrimack College in North Andover, Massachusetts, being one of the first in the school's history to major in Fine Arts. At Merrimack, he was active in the Onstagers Dramatic Society. He also played varsity baseball for the Warriors baseball team. During the summers of his college years, he was active in the training programs at the Williamstown Theatre Festival in Williamstown, Massachusetts. 

Career

Besides playing Charlie Kelly on the hit FX television series It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia, he is also one of the show's executive producers and one of its writers, along with Rob McElhenney and Glenn Howerton. He has also appeared on several other television shows such as Third Watch, Law & Order, and Reno 911!.

He appeared in New Line Cinema's Horrible Bosses in July 2011, with Jason Bateman, Jason Sudeikis, Kevin Spacey, Jennifer Aniston, Colin Farrell, and Jamie Foxx. He also had a role in the 2010 film Going the Distance, alongside Justin Long, Jason Sudeikis, and Drew Barrymore. In 2013, he voiced a character named Art in the Pixar animated film Monsters University and appeared in Guillermo del Toro's film Pacific Rim. Day is set to reprise his role for the Pacific Rim sequel.

Day has also been a producer for the television shows How to Be a Gentleman and Unsupervised.

Day hosted the November 5, 2011 episode of Saturday Night Live (SNL) with Maroon 5 as the musical guest. He was the second cast member from It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia to host SNL (after Danny DeVito, though DeVito hosted SNL before It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia premiered). DeVito made a special appearance during Day's opening monologue.

In September 2014, Day provided his voice for The Sims 4 TV spots.

Personal life

Day has been married to actress Mary Elizabeth Ellis since March 4, 2006. They met in 2001 and were dating in 2004 when they co-starred as incestuous siblings on Reno 911. Ellis has a recurring role on It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia as "The Waitress", a coffee shop employee and an object of obsession for Day's character. The couple had their first child, a son named Russell Wallace Day, on December 15, 2011.

Day has written and improvised some of the music featured in It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia.

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games

Awards and nominations


