
#Article: Alan Osmond
#Type: regular article

Alan Ralph Osmond (born June 22, 1949) was a member of the family musical group The Osmonds.

Life and career

Osmond was born in Ogden, Utah, United States, the son of Olive May (née Davis) and George Virl Osmond. He was the oldest of the seven siblings who could sing, as the two oldest brothers, Virl and Tom, are hearing impaired although Tom is currently under treatment. During much of the Osmonds' career, Alan was the leader of the group, playing piano, guitar, co-writing many of their songs and arranging the dance choreography. He has now retired from performing.

Four of the Osmonds were cast over a seven-year period on NBC's The Andy Williams Show. They also appeared in nine episodes of the 1963-1964 ABC western television series, The Travels of Jaimie McPheeters, with Alan in the role of young Micah Kissel. The series starred then 12-year-old Kurt Russell on a wagon train headed to the American West.

Personal life

Osmond dated the Carpenters' lead singer, Karen Carpenter. He later married Suzanne Pinegar on July 16, 1974. He and Suzanne have eight sons, who perform as the Osmond Brothers Second Generation: Michael Alan (1975); Nathan George (1977); Douglas Kenneth (1978); David Levi (1979); Scott Merrill (1981); Jonathon Pinegar (1983); Alexander Thomas (1988); and Tyler James (1990). Alan, like all the Osmond's, is a devout Mormon; seven of his sons have served Mormon missions, and the youngest son Tyler did not serve.

Alan has multiple sclerosis.  His son, David Osmond, lead singer of the group Osmonds 2nd Generation, who also has multiple sclerosis, participated in the eighth season of American Idol on January 28, 2009 with a pass to Hollywood. However, due to laryngitis, he was not able to make it past Hollywood week.

In 2000, Alan Osmond received the Dorothy Corwin Spirit of Life Award from the National Multiple Sclerosis Society. In his acceptance speech, he stated that he had done some time in the military and that he had taken karate lessons from Chuck Norris, both of which reinforced the "you can do it" attitude that he learned from his father. His motto is, "I may have MS, but MS does NOT have me!" He currently runs the OneHeart Foundation and also works as a motivational speaker.

Military service

Alan enlisted in the California National Guard in the late 1960s. He served at Fort Ord in northern California in the 144th Artillery.


