
#Article: Dominic Dim Deng
#Type: regular article

Dominic Dim Deng (1 March 1950 - 2 May 2008) was a senior member of Sudan People's Liberation Army/Movement, a distinguished military veteran General and the first Defence Minister in the Government of Southern Sudan who lost his life alongside his wife Madam Josephine Apieu Jenaro Aken, senior politician Dr. Justin Yac Arop and 18 other Sudan People's Liberation Army and Government of Southern Sudan officials on a leased CEM Air Beechcraft 1900 that crashed 375 km west of Juba, Sudan on May 2, 2008.

Life and career

Dominic Dim, a member of the Dinka group from the Bahr el Ghazal region was born in a remote village called Adol in Twic County, Warrap State, Southern Sudan. In 1962, he attended Nyarkach Primary School. He completed his primary education at Nyarkach and joined Kuajok Intermediate School in 1964. 

In 1966 at the age of only sixteen Dim joined the rebels of Southern Sudan in the First Sudanese Civil War. A peace agreement was signed in 1972 between the rebels and the Government of Sudan, known as the Addis Ababa Agreement, as part of the agreement Dim was absorbed in the Sudanese National Army (SNA) with a rank of 1st Lt.

While he was on active duty in the SNA, Dim underwent several military courses. He passed all of the courses top of his batch as a result he was able to make rapid and regular promotions at different ranks in the Sudan National Army. With a new war brewing in the South, Dim eventually decided to leave the Sudan National Army with a rank of Col. and join SPLM/A in 1987.

His first assignment was Deputy Commander for Northern Zone (Bahr el Ghazal) which was commanded by the President of Southern Sudan Salva Kiir Mayardit. Two years later, he was promoted to Commander and assigned to Central Zone (Bor, Jonglei), where he defeated Saif El Hobuor. Cdr Diim was wounded in this operation and was given permission to travel to London for medical treatment in 1991/1992.

While on medical leave in London, United Kingdom, Dim obtained BA Honorary degree in Business Administration in 1998. 

In 2004 Dim was appointed as member of National Liberation Council, the highest political organ of the SPLM/A. In 2005, Dim became commander of Special Reserved Forces (Sudan People's Liberation Army) and nominated by Twic Mayardit Community as member of the South Sudan Legislative Assembly, a position he served until his death.

In 2005, when Sudan's Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) was signed all the SPLA ranks were converted to be similar to that of Sudan Armed Forces (SAF) ranks. Dim was promoted to the rank of Lt. General. In 2006 Lt. Gen. Dim was sent to South Africa for military leadership course, part of a programme initiated by the South African Government, for SPLM/A senior staff. 

In 2007 he became the first political officer of the Sudan People's Liberation Army when he was appointed as the first Minister for SPLA Affairs in the Government of Southern Sudan. He was also locally elected as the Chairperson of Warrap State Communities. 

Dim is buried alongside his wife at the Sudan People's Liberation Army Headquarters in Juba.

Personal life

Dim was married to Josephine Apieu Jenaro Aken whom he met at Pannyok School where her father Jenario Aken was a teacher. They were married in 1973.


