
#Article: Ben Mulroney
#Type: regular article

Benedict Martin Paul "Ben" Mulroney (born March 9, 1976) is a Canadian television host. He is the oldest son of former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney.

Early life

Mulroney was born in Montreal, Quebec and grew up in Ottawa, Ontario. He is the second of four children born to former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and Mila Pivnicki Mulroney, who is of Serbian descent. He attended the Hotchkiss School and earned a Bachelor of Arts degree, with a major in history, from Duke University. He subsequently earned a Bachelor of Laws degree from Université Laval.

Career

Mulroney is best known as the host of the entertainment news program, etalk where he covers major events in entertainment, including the Oscars, the Golden Globes, and the Juno Awards. He is known for hosting Canadian Idol. From 2001 to 2002, he was entertainment reporter on Canada AM. He wrote a regular column for the Toronto Sun. In April 2009, Mulroney added radio show host to his résumé with the launch of the CHUM Radio show, etalk 20. The two-hour radio program is broadcast on 11 radio stations across Canada and counts down the top 20 chart-topping hits and includes celebrity interviews.

In February 2010, Mulroney and other staff from etalk covered the Vancouver 2010 Olympic Winter Games for CTV. In 2006, he was appointed as the National Ambassador for UNICEF Canada.

On June 2012, ABC's News President Ben Sherwood announced that Mulroney would be temporarily substituting for Dan Harris during the weekends, while serving as contributor to Good Morning America. This comes after Mulroney's previous stints as temporary co-host with Kelly Ripa on "Live! with Kelly and Michael" Mulroney is one of several children of former Prime Ministers who became Canadian media personalities between 1998 and 2001. The others include Catherine Clark, Justin Trudeau and Alexandre Trudeau. Mulroney was invited to and attended Justin Trudeau's wedding.

Personal life

Mulroney became engaged to his girlfriend of one year, fashion designer and stylist Jessica Brownstein, on December 28, 2007 in Montreal. They were married on October 30, 2008 in a private ceremony at St. Patrick's Basilica, Montreal. Brownstein is Jewish.

They have 3 children: sons, who are fraternal twins, Brian Gerald Alexander Mulroney and John Benedict Dimitri Mulroney (born August 12, 2010) and daughter Isabel Veronica Mulroney (born June 12, 2013).


