
#Article: Gabriella Wilde
#Type: regular article

Gabriella Wilde (born Gabriella Zanna Vanessa Anstruther-Gough-Calthorpe; 8 April 1989), also known as Gabriella Calthorpe, is an English model and actress who has appeared in the films The Three Musketeers (2011), Carrie (2013) and Endless Love (2014).

Early life

Wilde was born in Basingstoke, Hampshire, England. She is descended from the aristocratic Gough-Calthorpe family. Her father, businessman John Anstruther-Gough-Calthorpe, is a former chairman of the Watermark Group, and the grandson of baronet Fitzroy Anstruther-Gough-Calthorpe. Her mother, Vanessa Mary Theresa (née Hubbard), is the former wife of socialite Sir Dai Llewellyn, 4th Baronet. Vanessa is a former model who sat for David Bailey and John Swannell. Through her maternal grandfather, Wilde's ancestors include Montagu Bertie, 6th Earl of Abingdon, General the Hon. Thomas Gage, and Stephanus Van Cortlandt, the first native-born Mayor of New York City. Wilde's maternal grandmother's parents were peers Bernard Fitzalan-Howard, 3rd Baron Howard of Glossop and Mona Fitzalan-Howard, 11th Baroness Beaumont.

Wilde has a younger sister, Octavia, as well as five half-siblings: Olivia and Arabella Llewellyn, from her mother's first marriage, and Georgiana, Isabella, and Jacobi, from her father's first marriage, to Lady Mary-Gaye Curzon. She is also "unofficial stepsisters" with Pandora Cooper-Key and Cressida Bonas, Lady Mary-Gaye's other daughters. Isabella and Olivia are also actresses.

Wilde attended Heathfield St Mary's School, Ascot and St Swithun's School, Winchester, before leaving to pursue a course in art while continuing with her modeling career. She smuggled vodka into Heathfield, resulting in suspension and a transfer to the prestigious St Swithun's. She studied fine art at the City and Guilds of London Art School but dropped out to pursue acting.

Career

Wilde began her career as a model. Spotted at age 14 by Naomi Campbell, she joined her agency Premier Model Management and appeared in campaigns for companies including L.K.Bennett, Lacoste, Abercrombie & Fitch, Burberry, Topshop and posed for InStyle, Cosmopolitan, Vogue and Nylon. In 2007, she was named the second-most-eligible girl in Britain but rejected press attention and the "It girl" label. She did not do her first interview until 2008, when she said: "I don't understand why I got anywhere near such a list because I have done nothing to help it. It's the same with my sister Isabella - we both avoid the society thing. We never go to parties, we never hang out in the clubs associated with all that - we are incredibly private."

In December 2009, Wilde made her acting debut in the adventure comedy film St Trinian's 2: The Legend of Fritton's Gold. In May 2010, Wilde appeared in an episode of the BBC television series Doctor Who.

In December 2010, Wilde was announced to have been cast in her film debut in the adventure film The Three Musketeers, an adaptation of the novel of the same name. Wilde portrayed the role of the queen's lady-in-waiting Constance Bonacieux and starred alongside Orlando Bloom and Logan Lerman. The film was released in October 2011 and went on to make over $132 million worldwide. The film was poorly received by critics with a rating of 24% on Rotten Tomatoes based on reviews from 90 critics. In March 2012, Wilde was cast in the ABC Sci-Fi television pilot Dark Horse. The series centers on a science student who learns that he is the chosen one, tasked with destroying the forces of evil. The pilot was not picked up by ABC for the 2012 - 2013 television season. That same year Wilde starred in the Short Film Il Maestro and is attached to another film titled Squatters.

As well as Dark Horse, Wilde was cast in the MGM and Screen Gems' remake, Carrie, that same month (as Sue Snell). The film was directed by Boys Don't Cry director Kimberly Peirce and starred Chloë Grace Moretz and Julianne Moore. Filming began in June 2012 and it was released in October 2013.

In 2014, she starred in the remake of Endless Love, opposite Alex Pettyfer.

Personal life

Wilde married musician Alan Pownall on 13 September 2014. She gave birth to their son, Sasha Blue Pownall, on February 3, 2014.

Ancestry

Filmography


