
#Article: Trista Sutter
#Type: regular article

Trista Nicole Sutter (née Rehn) (born October 28, 1972 in Indianapolis, Indiana) was the runner-up on season 1 of the ABC reality television show The Bachelor, before becoming the star of the first season of its companion show, The Bachelorette.

Trista has also appeared on ABC's Dancing with the Stars and NBC's Fear Factor.

The Bachelor

Trista appeared as a contestant on season 1 of ABC's The Bachelor. She finished runner-up after bachelor Alex Michel selected Amanda Marsh as the winner ahead of Trista in the show's finale.

The Bachelorette

After her appearance on The Bachelor, Trista was selected to be featured in the gender-reversed spin-off, The Bachelorette. She chose Ryan Sutter as the winner, and the couple were married on December 6, 2003. They were paid US$1 million by ABC for affording the network the right to televise their wedding ceremony, which was broadcast as the finale of a three-episode special called Trista & Ryan's Wedding. The miniseries, filmed at "The Lodge" luxury resort in Rancho Mirage, California, drew over 26 million viewers, making it one of the most-widely viewed episodes in the history of reality television.

Television appearances

Under her birth name, Rehn was a Miami Heat cheerleader in the early 2000s.

Trista appeared opposite actor Jason Alexander in a KFC commercial. She also has appeared in country music singer Brad Paisley's music video "Celebrity" in 2003 with Alexander, Little Jimmy Dickens, and William Shatner.

In 2005 she made a guest appearance on an episode of NBC's Fear Factor, cheering on Ryan Sutter, who was a contestant. 

Trista was a contestant on season one of the television show Dancing with the Stars.

On June 10, 2011 Trista and Ryan Sutter appeared in a Hands Only CPR PSA campaign from the American Heart Association and the Ad Council.

In 2014, Trista and Ryan appeared on the program Marriage Boot Camp: Reality Stars.

In 2015, Trista and Ryan were contestants in Bachelor Fan Favorites Week on Who Wants to Be a Millionaire.

Personal life

The Sutters and their two children now live in Eagle County, Colorado. 


