
#Article: Laura Lopes
#Type: regular article

Laura Rose Lopes (née Parker Bowles; born 1 January 1978) is a British art curator. Lopes is the daughter of Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall, and Andrew Parker Bowles. Her mother's remarriage in 2005 made Charles, Prince of Wales, her stepfather. She has one elder brother, Tom Parker Bowles. Through marriage, she is a member of the Astor family.

Family, education and career

Laura Lopes grew up at Bolehyde Manor in Allington, Wiltshire and later Middlewick House in Corsham, Wiltshire. She and her brother Tom were raised as Roman Catholics. Both their father and their paternal grandmother, Ann, were also Catholic.

Lopes was educated at St Mary's Shaftesbury, a Catholic girls boarding school in Dorset. In the 1980s, she and her brother attended Heywood Preparatory School in Corsham. She later attended Oxford Brookes University, where she studied History of Art and Marketing.

In 2001, Lopes spent three months as an intern at the Peggy Guggenheim Collection in Venice, where she said years later that she still visited when in Venice. She was Tatlers motoring correspondent in 2001 when her brother Tom was hired as a food columnist at the same magazine. Lopes managed The Space Gallery in London's Belgravia area in the mid-2000s, and in October 2005 became a co-founding partner and gallery director of London's Eleven gallery.

Marriage

In 2006, Lopes married chartered accountant Harry Lopes. He is the grandson of Massey Lopes, 2nd Baron Roborough, and Helen Dawson, as well as of Gavin Astor, 2nd Baron Astor of Hever, and Irene Haig. Harry studied at Eton College and the University of Edinburgh, and formerly worked as a Calvin Klein underwear model. He stands to inherit Gnaton Hall, near Plymouth in Devon, and the 3,000-acre (12 km²) Skelpick estate in the Scottish Highlands.

The wedding took place on 6 May 2006 in St Cyriac's Church, an 11th-century Anglican church in Lacock, Wiltshire. Lopes wore a wedding dress by Anna Valentine, the same designer known for designing her mother's dress for her wedding to the Prince of Wales in 2005. 400-500 guests attended the wedding and more than 2,000 well-wishers lined the streets after the ceremony. The reception was held at Ray Mill, the nearby estate of the bride's mother.

Children

In July 2007, Lopes announced to the News of the World that she and her husband were expecting their first child, anticipated for January 2008. She gave birth to a daughter, Eliza, on 16 January.In July 2009 it was announced that the Lopeses were expecting twins. On 30 December 2009, Laura Lopes gave birth to fraternal twin boys named Gus and Louis.

Eliza was a bridesmaid at the wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton on 29 April 2011.

Ancestry


