
#Article: Candi Milo
#Type: regular article

Candi Milo (born January 9, 1961) is an American voice actress. She has voiced various characters on many animated series including Tiny Toon Adventures, The Replacements, Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends, Cow and Chicken, Swat Kats: The Radical Squadron, W.I.T.C.H., Maya & Miguel, The Life and Times of Juniper Lee, The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius, My Life as a Teenage Robot, and Codename: Kids Next Door.

Early life and career

Candyce Anne Rose Milo was born in Palm Springs, California, however shortly after her family moved to San Jose, where she attended the all-girls Presentation High School. Her father, Tony Migliaccio was a child actor who changed his name to Milo when he started playing adult roles. Her first appearance on stage was with her father at Turk Murphy's in 1964, where they sang Me and My Shadow together. By the time Milo was eleven, she was participating in children's musical theater.

In 1977, she began singing in theme park attractions, most notably at Disneyland in Anaheim and afterwards started appearing in roles in movies and television series such as Gimme a Break!, Knots Landing, and Perfect Strangers. Milo was also a member of "The Mighty Carson Art Players"" on The Tonight Show with Johnny Carson. She accidentally got into voice over after singing on stage. She was signed by The William Morris Agency for voice acting, which was initially disappointing to her because Milo originally wanted a singing career but settled with a voice over career.

Milo's first voice role was Sweetie Pie in Tiny Toon Adventures in 1990. She later played Lonette, an attractive animated waitress; Bob, a member of Holli Would's gang of goons who was a crossdresser and other characters in Cool World in addition to feeding lines to the other actors.

She went on to be very active in cartoons, voicing Pakka in Cro, Ann Gora in Swat Kats: The Radical Squadron, Little Red Riding Hood in 2 Stupid Dogs, and the main characters' Mom, who was an unseen character and their teacher in Cow and Chicken.

Later she replaced Christine Cavanaugh as the voice of Dexter in Dexter's Laboratory in 2001, when Ms. Cavanaugh retired from voice acting for personal reasons, and Milo voiced Dexter to the end of the show. Her other voice credits include Snap from ChalkZone, The Flea on ¡Mucha Lucha!, and the title character in the U.S. version of the 2003 Astro Boy (Tetsuwan Atomu) series.

From 2003-09, she did the voice of Dr. Nora Wakeman in My Life as a Teenage Robot. For this role, she was subsequently nominated for the Annie Award in 2004 and 2005.During this time, the actress also voiced the Ophelia Ramirez in The Life and Times of Juniper Lee, Irma Lair in W.I.T.C.H., Zadavia in Loonatics Unleashed, as well as Coco, Madame Foster and Cheese in Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends.

Milo says that when creating a unique voice the artist's drawings speak to her and that she prides herself on creating "a full life" for each character.

In October 2015, she made her return to the stage, playing the role of Grandmama Addams in the 3-D Theatricals' version of The Addams Family.

Personal life

A single mother who has never married, she lives in the Silverlake suburb of Los Angeles with her daughter .

Filmography

	 2 Stupid Dogs - Little Red Riding Hood, Mama Bear, Female Platypus

	 The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius - Nick Dean

	 Aladdin - Thundra

	 All Grown Up! - Justin, Brianna and Amelia

	 American Dragon: Jake Long - Wudgya

	 An American Tail: The Mystery of the Night Monster - Madam Mousey

	 The Angry Beavers - Tanya Goode

	 The Ant Bully - Nurse #3

	 Astro Boy (English dub) - Astro Boy, Kennedy

	 As Told by Ginger - Claire Gripling

	 Baby Felix & Friends - Skippy

	 Baten Kaitos Origins - Almarde

	 Batman Beyond - Nicole (Ep. "Dead Man's Hand")

	 Big Top Scooby-Doo! - Jean

	 Breadwinners - Roni (Ep. "Pizzawinners")

	 Bob and Margaret - Rachel (Ep. "Problems")

	 Bubble Guppies - Elderly Crab (Ep. "Come to Your Senses!"), additional voices

	 The Buzz on Maggie - Chip, Mrs. Wingston

	 Captain Planet and the Planeteers - Betty Jean (Ep. "Going Bats, Man")

	 Cartoon Network Universe: FusionFall - Dexter, Coco, Cheese

	 ChalkZone - Snap

	 Chowder - Frog Lady, Chicken Lady, Rosemary, Big Food, Droopy Faced Lady, Eagle, Girl, Gyoza, Sexy Lady Voice, Rake, additional voices

	 Clifford's Puppy Days - Nina's Mother, Hester, Gray Puppy

	 Codename: Kids Next Door - Henrietta Von Marzipan, Mrs. Betty Gilligan, Lydia (Grandma) Gilligan, Leaky Leona, Lasso Lass, Miss Goodwall, Edna Jucation, Heli-Teacher, Madam Margaret and one of the Girl Squad

	 Cool World - Lonette, Bob

	 Cow and Chicken - Mom, Teacher

	 Cro - Nandy

	 Curious George - Mrs. Quint,Mrs Donuts

	 Darkwing Duck - Duck Ling, Lamont, Additional voices

	 Dexter's Laboratory - Dexter (Seasons 3-4)

	 Dissidia Final Fantasy - Shantotto

	 Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy - Shantotto

	 Duck Dodgers - Rikki Roundhouse (Ep. "The Menace of Maninsuit")

	 El Tigre: The Adventures of Manny Rivera - Zoe Aves/Black Cuervo

	 Fanboy and Chum Chum - Lupe, Cher Leader, Madame LaVache, Ms. Olive, Francine, Lunch Lady Cram and Marsha

	 Final Fantasy X/Final Fantasy X-2 - Dona, Lucil, Pacce

	 Final Fantasy XIII - Additional Voices

	 Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends - Madame Foster, Coco, Cheese, Crackers, Additional Voices

	 Gravity Falls - Additional Voices

	 Groovy Girls - Gwen, Daphne, Kendra, Abuela, and others

	 Hey Arnold! - Charice, Parrot

	 Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius - Nick Dean, Britanny, PJ

	 Johnny Bravo - Helga (Ep. "To Helga and Back")

	 Kick Buttowski: Suburban Daredevil - Additional voices

	 Kingdom Hearts III - Yzma

	 Kung Fu Magoo - Gor-Illiana

	 Loonatics Unleashed - Zadavia

	 Los Lunnis - Lupita (English dub)

	 Maya & Miguel - Maya Santos, Tito Chavez

	 Me, Eloise - Margarita, Bruce, Bobby, Emmy, Tutor Candidate #1, Betty

	 Mirmo! - Bike

	 ¡Mucha Lucha! - The Flea, Pulgita, The Headmistress, Ricochet's Mom

	 My Gym Partner's A Monkey - Additional Voices

	 My Life as a Teenage Robot - Ms. Nora Wakeman

	 Pepper Ann - Constance Goldman

	 Pet Alien - Gabby, Tommy's Mom, Melba

	 Phineas and Ferb - Additional Voices

	 Pig Goat Banana Cricket - Goat

	 Poochini's Yard - Additional voices

	 Planet Sheen - Princess OomLout

	 Random! Cartoons - Yumi, Octopus, Nurse Duckett, Bee

	 Santo Bugito - Mother Bug, Rose

	 Secret Mountain Fort Awesome - TBA

	 Scooby-Doo and the Alien Invaders - Crystal, Amber

	 Scooby-Doo! and the Monster of Mexico - Charlene, Museum Guide, Old Woman #1

	 Scooby-Doo! Frankencreepy - Lila

	 Scooby-Doo! Stage Fright - Barb Damon

	 Spirited Away - Additional voices (English dub)

	 Stanley - Ms. Diaz

	 SWAT Kats: The Radical Squadron - Ann Gora

	 The Emperor's New School - Coach Sweetie; Yzma

	 The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy - Grim's Mom

	 The Happy Elf - Curtis, Cassie, Gurt, Little Girl

	 The Legend of Calamity Jane - Zita

	 The Life and Times of Juniper Lee - Ophelia Ramírez, Barbara Lee

	 The Looney Tunes Show - Svetlana ("Fish and Visitors")

	 The Mummy: Secrets of the Medjai - Tiga (Ep. "The Cloud People")

	 The New Woody Woodpecker Show - Teany

	 The Plucky Duck Show - Sweetie Pie

	 The Replacements - Amanda McMurphy, Jacobo

	 The Secret Saturdays - Dr. Pachacutes, Arab Reporter

	 The Tick - Blitzen ("Tock vs Europe")

	 The Wild Thornberrys - Additional voices

	 Tiny Toon Adventures - Sweetie Pie

	 T.U.F.F. Puppy - The Queen

	 Valkyria Chronicles - Additional voices (as Candy Milo)

	 W.I.T.C.H. - Irma Lair, Anna Lair, Trill, Principal Knickerbocker

	 What A Cartoon Show - Cow and Chicken's Mom, Mary Antelope, Effie Gorilla, Jill Gorilla, Timmy, Teacher, Female Eskimo, Stewardess, Poopsie

	 Where on Earth is Carmen Sandiego? - Additional voices

Live action

	 Days of Our Lives - Janey Richards

	 Perfect Strangers - Gina Morelli

	 Reaching for the Stars - Herself

	 Gimme a Break! - Leslie

	 Bad Medicine - Maria Morales

	 Knots Landing - Nurse

	 Almost an Angel - Bank Teller

	 Doogie Howser, MD - Doctor

	 I Don't Buy Kisses Anymore - Mother in Store

	 Night Court - Woman

	 Empty Nest - Mrs. Ortiz

	 At Home with the Webbers - 2nd Woman on Street

	 Ripper Man - Francie

	 City Guys - Rude Customer

	 Wilfred - Secretary

Theater

	 Twelfth Night - Maria

	 Life's Too Short - One-Woman Show

	 Hip is a Relative Term - One-Woman Show

	 Dreamgirls - Ensemble Soloist

	 To Sir, With Love - Baby

	 Funny Business - Ensemble

	 Just for Laughs Festival - Stand Up Comedienne

	 The Addams Family - Grandmama Addams


