
#Article: Ryan Sutter
#Type: regular article

Ryan Allen Sutter (born September 14, 1974) was the "winner" (final bachelor) chosen by Trista Rehn on the television show The Bachelorette. Sutter, a Colorado firefighter, and Rehn were married in a televised wedding on ABC on December 6, 2003. The miniseries was filmed at "The Lodge" luxury resort in Rancho Mirage, California. Prior to that, he was a star college football defensive back with the Colorado Buffaloes football team, and was eventually drafted by the Baltimore Ravens of the National Football League in the 1998 Draft, but lasted only a couple of seasons as a professional football player mainly due to injuries.

Career

Born in Fort Collins, Colorado, Sutter is a firefighter in Colorado. He has also worked as a model.

Football career

Sutter was a star defensive back in college with the Colorado Buffaloes football team. He was drafted by the Baltimore Ravens in the fifth round of the 1998 NFL Draft. He was cut late in the 1998 training camp. He then signed with the Carolina Panthers a few days later, not making the active roster until November 28, 1998 (he previously was on the Panther's practice squad). In the very first play of his first ever game in the NFL, he injured his shoulder while making a tackle against the New York Jets. He was immediately placed on injured reserve and eventually released. The following summer, he signed with the Seattle Seahawks, but he was cut. In 2000, Sutter played one season for the Barcelona Dragons of NFL Europe. In the spring of 2005, Ryan was invited to a tryout with the New Orleans Saints, but suffered a knee injury during the minicamp. He has not been in the NFL since.

Personal life

The Sutters live in Eagle County, Colorado. Ryan is a Vail, Colorado firefighter.

In February 2007, the Sutters told People magazine that they were expecting their first child in summer of 2007, but they wanted the sex of the baby to be a surprise. In an interview, Ryan stated that if they had a girl, then they would like to have a boy next, but if they had a boy first, then they wanted a girl second.

In July 2007, Maxwell Alston was born 4 weeks early stemming from pregnancy complications via c-section after a failed induction/stalled labor. During her seventh month of pregnancy, Rehn was diagnosed with gestational diabetes. Max was first revealed to the public on the cover of Us Weekly magazine and made his first on-camera appearance in a video diary series Trista recorded for Momlogic.com.

On October 14, 2008, Trista and Ryan Sutter announced to Life and Style Magazine that she was pregnant with their second child. Trista said that she was considering having her tubes tied after delivering, and if the baby turned out to be another boy, they would seek adoption of a girl.

In April 2009, Trista delivered daughter Blakesley Grace by C-section.

On June 10, 2011 Ryan and Trista appeared in a Hands Only CPR PSA campaign from the American Heart Association and the Ad Council.


