
#Article: Karin Giannone
#Type: regular article

Karin Giannone (born in 1974 in Johannesburg, South Africa) is a South African-born British television newsreader working in the United Kingdom. She returned from maternity leave on 6 February 2010 and is the London-based main presenter of the weekend daytime coverage on BBC World News. She is the main presenter of World News Today along with Philippa Thomas and Kasia Madera broadcast on both BBC Four and BBC World News.

Early life

Giannone was born in Johannesburg, in South Africa, in January 1974. She moved with her family to the United Kingdom when she was aged two. She was brought up in Edinburgh, Sussex and Kent.

Education

Giannone was educated at Moira House School, an independent school for girls in Eastbourne in Sussex, George Watson's College, a co-educational independent school in Edinburgh, and Cranbrook School, a co-educational state grammar school in Kent, followed by Newnham College at the University of Cambridge, where she studied Modern Languages, and graduated with a first class honours degree. She speaks French, German and Italian. She was the editor of Cambridge University’s Varsity student newspaper in 1994-95.

Life and career

Giannone's editorship of Varsity magazine at Cambridge led to work experience at Anglia Television. She joined the regional ITV station on graduation in Norwich as a news trainee in 1997, producing, reporting and presenting for regional news bulletins. In 1999 her language and broadcasting skills helped her land a role as a reporter and presenter for Channel 4’s Football Italia series, where she covered the Italian Soccer scene for a season, flying between the UK and Italy every week. She returned to Anglia in 2000 as a presenter and reporter, this time for the programme for the east of the region covering Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex. She also followed troops from the region for a series of reports from Afghanistan in 2002.

Giannone then moved to London to present a variety of shifts for Sky News, before joining BBC News in 2005. Her work assignments have included a stint presenting World News Today on BBC World News channel from Washington at 10pm EST during July/August 2008.

She presented live coverage from South Africa following the death of Nelson Mandela in 2013.

From 3 March 2014, Giannone presented live coverage on the BBC News channel at the trial of Oscar Pistorius in Pretoria, South Africa. She is now a regular presenter of World News Today and Impact on BBC World News channel.

Personal life

Giannone lives in London with her husband Neil. The couple have three children (son Louis, 23 October 2003; daughters Beatrice, January 2006 and Florence, October 2009)  Her interests include street dance, horse-riding, going to the gym, scuba diving, travelling, eating out (especially Indian food) and watching lots of TV, with news and documentaries her favourite programmes.


