
#Article: Steve Doocy
#Type: regular article

Stephen James "Steve" Doocy (; born October 19, 1956) is an American journalist, network-television personality on the Fox News Channel, and a best-selling author.

Early life

Doocy was born in Algona, Iowa, and raised in Abilene, Kansas. He attended Kansan grade schools in Russell, Salina, and Industry. He went to junior high in Wakefield and high school in Clay Center, Kansas. He graduated from the University of Kansas, in Lawrence, with a BS in Journalism. He was the first on-air DJ for KJHK radio, the student-operated radio station at 90.7 FM in Lawrence.

Career

Early in his career, Doocy anchored the morning newscast on CBS-TV's flagship station, WCBS-TV, in New York City. Previously, he was the co-host of Wake Up America on NBC cable and host of the nationally syndicated program House Party with Steve Doocy, a remake of the 1960s Art Linkletter show, and the host of the syndicated kids' series Not Just News. For six years, Doocy was the Emmy Award-winning features reporter for WRC, in Washington, D.C., and the NBC Television Stations division. His early television posts included news reporter positions in Kansas City, Wichita, Topeka, and Des Moines. He was the live Times Square reporter on Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve on ABC-TV for four ball drops.

Doocy joined the Fox News Channel in 1996. In 2004, he helped launch Fox News Channel's New Year's Eve special, All American New Year, which is currently hosted by Bill Hemmer and Megyn Kelly. Doocy is best-known for being one of the regular hosts for the Fox News Channel's weekday morning wake-up show, along with Elisabeth Hasselbeck and Brian Kilmeade.

Literature

Doocy has written two New York Times bestsellers. The first is about marriage and family life, entitled The Mr. and Mrs. Happy Handbook. The second is about fatherhood, entitled Tales from the Dad Side. When asked why he wrote the book, he told The 700 Club on TV, "I wanted to write that book just to show that dads are out there - we don't know exactly what we're doing. We're doing our best and we love our kids. There aren't so many books for guys. It's not like we get a lot of advice from our dads, 'Just hold him still; he’ll stop crying.' And, ad lib - what I learned early is that while guys like to have plans, you should plan to ad lib. There's a lot of ad libbing in the dad department." Both books are published by William Morrow and Company, a division of HarperCollins.

Personal life

Doocy is married with three children, including fellow Fox News reporter Peter Doocy. He lives in Wyckoff, New Jersey. He is Roman Catholic and serves as a lector in his church.


