
#Article: Michelle Lujan Grisham
#Type: regular article

Michelle Lujan Grisham (born October 24, 1959) is an American lawyer and politician who is the U.S. Representative for , serving since 2013. She has served in the New Mexico state cabinet, and as Bernalillo County Commissioner.

Early life and education

Lujan Grisham was born in Los Alamos, New Mexico, and grew up in Santa Fe. Her father, Buddy Lujan, practiced dentistry into his 80s until he died in March 2011. Her mother, Sonja, stayed at home. Michelle's sister Kimberly was diagnosed with a brain tumor when she was two years old. She quickly exhausted her lifetime caps on her health insurance. She died when she was 21 and the parents spent decades after Kimberly’s death paying off the debt, making health care reform an important issue for Michelle.

She graduated from St. Michael's High School. She received a bachelor of university studies degree from the University of New Mexico (UNM) in 1981. She earned a law degree from the UNM School of Law in 1987.

Public sector career

Lujan Grisham served as director of New Mexico's Agency on Aging under Governors Bruce King, Gary Johnson, and Bill Richardson, who elevated the position to the state cabinet. In 2004, Richardson named Lujan Grisham the secretary of the Department of Health. 

Lujan Grisham served as a Bernalillo County Commissioner from 2010 through 2012.

Congressional elections

2008

She resigned as Secretary of Health in order to run for the United States House of Representatives in the 2008 elections, losing in the Democratic primary to Martin Heinrich. He won the Democratic primary on June 3, 2008 with 44% of the vote. New Mexico Secretary of State Rebecca Vigil-Giron ranked second with 25% and Michelle Lujan-Grisham ranked third with 24% of the vote.

2012

Lujan Grisham sought the Democratic nomination for the House in 2012, with Martin Heinrich leaving to run for the United States Senate. She won the nomination, defeating Marty Chavez and Eric Griego. She faced Janice Arnold-Jones, a former member of the New Mexico House of Representatives, in the November general election. Lujan Grisham defeated Arnold-Jones, 59%-41%.

2014

Lujan Grisham defeated Republican Mike Frese in the 2014 elections, 59%-41%.

U.S. House of Representatives

Tenure

Congresswoman Lujan Grisham was sworn into a two-year term on January 3, 2013.

Committee assignments

	Committee on Agriculture

	Subcommittee on Department Operations, Oversight, and Nutrition

	Subcommittee on Livestock, Rural Development, and Credit

	Committee on the Budget

	Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

	Subcommittee on Energy Policy, Health Care and Entitlements

	Subcommittee on National Security

Personal life

Lujan Grisham's uncle is Manuel Lujan, Jr., who served in the House of Representatives from New Mexico as a Republican, and served as Secretary of Interior during the presidency of George H. W. Bush. Her grandfather, Eugene Lujan, was Chief Justice of the New Mexico Supreme Court. Her cousin, Ben R. Luján, represents New Mexico's 3rd congressional district in the House of Representatives, while his father, Ben Luján was Speaker of the New Mexico House of Representatives.

Lujan Grisham's husband, Gregory, died of a brain aneurysm in 2004. The couple had two daughters. Lujan Grisham filed a wrongful death suit against her husband's physician, which was dismissed.


