
#Article: Richard Steven Horvitz
#Type: regular article

Richard Steven Horvitz, also known as Richard Wood (born July 29, 1966),  is an American actor. In the world of animation, he is often cast as neurotic and mentally unstable characters. He is best known for his work as the voice of the original Alpha 5 in Mighty Morphin Power Rangers, Power Rangers Zeo, and Power Rangers Turbo, Razputin in Psychonauts, Kaos in the Skylanders franchise, Billy and his dad Harold in The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy, Grey Matter in Ben 10, Daggett in The Angry Beavers, Bumble in Kinectimals, the title character Zim in Invader Zim, Mouth in Kick Buttowski, and Orthopox in the Destroy All Humans! series. He also voiced The Space Weaver in the game Broken Age.

Career

Horvitz's film career began in 1976 with a Freshen Up Gum commercial, which led to other commercial appearances and several hand modeling jobs. After a brief stint in an off-Broadway production of Oliver!, he went on to make appearances on TV shows such as Kids Incorporated and Safe at Home and movies such as Summer School, How I Got Into College and Deadly Weapon. He also starred as Howie for two seasons on the 1988 syndicated television sitcom The Munsters Today which lasted three years until 1991. Howie was best friend of Marilyn Munster (played by actress Hilary Van Dyke). Starting in 1993, he changed the focus of his career to voice acting, starting with voice of Alpha 5 on the live-action series Mighty Morphin' Power Rangers. This is one of Richard's often-forgotten roles that he has performed. From here, he expanded into several other particular voice roles on such animated shows as The Angry Beavers (Daggett), Invader Zim (Zim), Kim Possible, Dave the Barbarian (Ned Frischman), Zatch Bell! (Kanchomé), The Grim Adventures of Billy and Mandy (Billy, Billy's dad), Ben 10 (Grey Matter), Squirrel Boy (Rodney), and Shorty McShorts' Shorts as Dudley. After his stint as Alpha 5 ended, Horvitz went on to voice a few monsters in other Power Rangers series, and was also the voice of Alpha 7 in the Power Rangers: Wild Force episode, "Forever Red". He also played the main character Razputin in Psychonauts and Orthopox in Destroy All Humans!, Destroy All Humans! 2, and Destroy All Humans! Path of the Furon, (not Destroy All Humans! Big Willy Unleashed) in a voice that closely resembles that of Zim (rather, what would happen if Zim adopted an English accent). He has voiced various NPCs in Everquest 2. He also does the voice of the Berserker Darklings in The Darkness, Bumble in Kinectimals, and Kaos in Skylanders: Spyro's Adventure. Richard also plays the character "Green Grapes" in the Fruit of the Loom commercials. He has also acted on stage, including in Jeffrey Hatcher's "Mrs. Mannerly" in Boston.

Personal life

Horvitz was born, grew up, resides, and currently works in Los Angeles. On the side he also taught voice acting and theater at the California State University, Northridge. He is a friend of Fred Willard, Rob Paulsen, Barry Dennen and Billy West, who voiced Zim in the pilot episode. He lives with his wife, playwright and screenwriter Kristen Lazarian, and their three sons; Cole, Jake, and Wyatt. The couple's oldest of their three sons, Jake Elliot Horvitz, was born April 11, 1997, an event proudly mentioned in one of his shows, The Angry Beavers. He and his wife also wrote "Keeper of the Reaper", an episode of The Grim Adventures of Billy and Mandy.

Filmography

Animation

	 The Angry Beavers - Daggett Beaver

	 As Told by Ginger - Mitchey Mickelberg

	 Ben 10 - Grey Matter, Sublimino, Lepidopterran Prisoner, Arnold

	 Betsy's Kindergarten Adventures - Scott

	 The Buzz on Maggie - Additional voices

	 ChalkZone - Additional voices

	 Codename: Kids Next Door - Crayon Boy

	 Danny Phantom - Additional voices

	 Dave the Barbarian - Ned Frischman

	 Dead Meat - Malockawokka

	 Detention - Additional voices

	 Dexter's Laboratory - Additional voices

	 El Tigre: The Adventures of Manny Rivera - Dr. Chipotle Sr., Diego, Dr. Chipotle Jr.

	 The Fairly OddParents - Bird

	 Fish Hooks - Ninja

	 Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends - Additional voices

	 Freakazoid! - Additional voices

	 The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy - Billy, Harold, additional voices

	 Histeria! - Additional voices

	 Invader Zim - Zim, Additional voices

	 Johnny Bravo - Ticket Taker, Bag Boy, Dr. Pencilneck, Guard

	 KaBlam! - Additional voices

	 Kick Buttowski: Suburban Daredevil - Mouth

	 Kim Possible - Aviarius (in "Go Team Go")

	 The Legend of Prince Valiant - Additional voices

	 Mad - Flop-Flips Announcer, Surgeon

	 The Mammal Team - Nutbite

	 The Mighty B! - Additional voices

	 Mqueen Zoom - Professor Shortbody

	 Poochini's Yard - Additional voices

	 Rocko's Modern Life - Additional voices

	 Rugrats - Various Teenage Characters

	 Shorty McShorts' Shorts - Dudley, Guard

	 Squirrel Boy - Rodney J. Squirrel

	 Static Shock - Jimmy Osgood

	 Tiny Toon Adventures - Additional voices

	 Totally Spies! - Theodor

	 Underfist: Halloween Bash - Billy, Harold

Anime

	 Duel Masters - Fritz

	 Zatch Bell! - Kanchome (2005-2006), Additional voices

Live action

	 Babylon 5 - Mark

	 Head of the Class - Oswald Bletch

	 MMPR/PRZ/PRT - Alpha 5 (1993-1997) (voice; credited as Richard Wood, credited in Christmas video as Richard Horvitz)

	 Mighty Morphin Power Rangers: The Movie - Alpha 5

	 Power Rangers in Space - Datascammer (voice) (1998)

	 Power Rangers: Lightspeed Rescue - Smogger (voice) (2000)

	 Power Rangers: Time Force - Mantamobile (voice) (2001)

	 Power Rangers: Wild Force (Forever Red) - Alpha 7 (2002) (voice; credited as Richard Horvitz)

	 Sabrina, the Teenage Witch - Various characters (voice)

	 Safe at Home - Gary Van Sickle

	 Thats So Raven - Teddy: Donna Cabonnas Boyfriend (in "Adventures in Boss-Siting")

	 The Adventures of Timmy the Tooth - Sherry the Fairy (voice)

	 The Chimp Channel - Timmy Briar (voice)

	 The Munsters Today - Howie Buchanan

	 VR Troopers - "Minotaurbot" (2nd voice) (1995)

	  Fruit of the Loom commercials - "Green Grapes"

	 Tosh.0 - Fred Willard fan

	 Working - Craig, Elevator Passenger

	 You Cant Take It with You - Leo

Films

	 Billy & Mandy's Big Boogey Adventure - Billy, Harold (Billy's Dad)

	 Billy & Mandy: Wrath of the Spider Queen - Billy, Caveman (Billy's Dad)

	 Cats & Dogs - Puppy at barn (uncredited) (voice)

	 Crazy, Stupid, Love - Extra (Hardware Store Assistant)

	 EuroTrip - ADR Performer

	 From Up on Poppy Hill - Additional Voices

	 Hop - Additional Voices

	 How I Got Into College - Young Enterpriser

	 Howl's Moving Castle - Additional Voices

	 Legends of Oz: Dorothy's Return - Munchin Suitor (voice)

	 Mulan - Chinese Soldier (voice)

	 Osmosis Jones - Additional voices

	 Pom Poko - Additional Voices

	 Race to Space - Keith

	 Sabrina Goes to Rome - Stonehenge (voice)

	 Saving Santa - Orange Haired Elf, Chestnut (voice)

	 Shaolin Soccer - Cheating Team Captain (voice)

	 Snow Dogs - Scooper (dream sequence) (voice)

	 Son of the Mask - Masked Otis (voice; shared with Bill Farmer)

	 Storm - Danny

	 Summer School - Alan Eakian (class nerd)

	 The Adventures of Galgameth - Kinch

	 The Informant! - Mark Whitacre's Attorney

	 The Wind Rises - Additional Voices

	 Turbo: A Power Rangers Movie - Alpha 5 (voice)

Video games

	 Ape Escape: On The Loose (US) - Spike, Child

	 Broken Age - Waltr, The Space Weaver

	 Brütal Legend - Kabbage Boy Guitarist, Jack the Lift-Op, various voices

	 Crash of the Titans - Brat Girl, Koo-Ala, Doom-Monkey

	 The Darkness - Berserker Darkling

	 Destroy All Humans! - Orthopox 13, Suburban Crazy

	 Destroy All Humans! 2 - Orthopox 13/Holopox

	 Destroy All Humans! Path of the Furon - Holopox (Orthopox 13), Orthopox 14

	 EverQuest II - Geredo, Guard Tanglor, Shawdowman, Skeleton, Snorgle Filthwallow, Gerbard the snitch, Cog Burn, Ogobre, Jubbs Tagglefoot, Gubbo Chaley, Farmer Walcott, Turtle

	 The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy - Billy, Mogar

	 Kinectimals - Bumble

	 League of Legends - Ziggs, Rumble

	 Mario Super Sluggers - Lakitu

	 Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots - PMC Soldiers

	 Nicktoons MLB - Zim

	 Nicktoons Nitro - Zim

	 Nicktoons Racing - Daggett "Dag" Beaver

	 PlayStation Move Heroes - Lunk, Zoni

	 Prototype 2 - Additional Voices

	 Psychonauts - Razputin "Raz" Aquato

	 Ratchet & Clank (series) - The Trio of Zoni, Stuart Zurgo, Tharpods, Various Characters

	 Resistance: Fall of Man - Slipskull

	 Rise of the Argonauts - Sinon

	 SpongeBob SquarePants featuring Nicktoons: Globs of Doom - Zim

	 Skylanders: Giants - Kaos

	 Skylanders: Spyros Adventure - Kaos

	 Skylanders: SuperChargers - Kaos

	 Skylanders: Swap Force - Kaos

	 Skylanders: Trap Team - Kaos

	WildStar - Creature

	 World of Warcraft: Mists of Pandaria - Fel Imp (Warlock minion), Saboteur Kiptilak, Kaztik the Manipulator

	 World of Warcraft: Warlords of Draenor - Additional voices

	 Zatch Bell! Mamodo Battles - Kanchome

Awards and Nominations

	 Nominated - Annie Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement for Voice Acting by a Male Performer in an Animated Television Production for Invader Zim - 2001


