
#Article: Matthew Amroliwala
#Type: regular article

Matthew Amroliwala (born 1962) is a BBC television newsreader, who presents Global with Matthew Amroliwala on BBC World News each weekday at 1500 hrs GMT. He is an occasional relief presenter of the BBC News at One on BBC One. He also presented Crimewatch alongside Kirsty Young from January 2008 until March 2015.

Biography

He was born Mehrwan F. Amroliwala in Leeds, West Riding of Yorkshire the son of a Royal Air Force officer.

His roots are in India, and he is a Parsi Zoroastrian. As his family name denotes, his ancestral hometown is Amroli in Surat District of the state of Gujarat in western India. He was educated at the King's School, Ely, Cambridgeshire and then at St Chad's College, Durham University. He graduated in 1984, having read Law and Politics. He was married in London to Jackie, a non-Parsi, in June 1999 and they have four children: Milo, Louis, Mary and Mabel.

After working as a chartered accountant, he joined the BBC and, in 1990, became a BBC network television correspondent. In 1997, he joined the BBC News Channel as a presenter of the channel's evening programmes and from the beginning of 2001, he has presented the late afternoon news programme, first with Jane Hill and then with Maxine Mawhinney. In April 2006, he was re-united with Hill on the 11 am-2 pm shift until March 2013 when the duo moved to the 2 pm-5 pm slot on Tuesday to Friday; Emily Maitlis co-presents on Mondays.

He has covered many major news stories, including reporting extensively from Northern Ireland. He has also reported from Bosnia on the fall of Srebrenica and travelled throughout the Balkans during the conflict in Bosnia. Since January 2008, he has co-presented the programme Crimewatch with Kirsty Young and Rav Wilding (later Martin Bayfield), specialising in the solved cases, but missed the March 2015 episode, and was covered by Jason Mohammad.

Since 8th September 2014, he has presented the flagship programme Global on BBC World News, the BBC’s international news channel


