
#Article: Chuck Huber
#Type: regular article

Charles Cody "Chuck" Huber (born May 8, 1971) is an American voice actor, ADR director and ADR script writer primarily known for his work for Funimation/OkraTron 5000. He has provided numerous voices for Japanese anime series and video games. He is best known for his dub roles of Hiei from Yu Yu Hakusho and Android 17 from Dragon Ball Z.

Career

Huber has also been a TV, film and stage actor in over 20 years, most notably at Chicago’s Steppenwolf and Goodman Theaters; as the Director/Writer of Arbor Day - The Musical; as a producer, co-writer and co-star of the bi-lingual feature Fragility of Seconds, which took the top prize at the Houston International Film Festival; and in guest starring roles on NBC, FOX, CBS dramas. Huber is a Stage West board member.

Huber has also worked in the education field as a workshop leader, teacher and principal for 20 years in a variety of settings from Southern Methodist University's Cox School of Business to communities in Owerri, Nigeria; as a founder, consultant or board member for five different schools, and as an author of numerous articles for education periodicals, children's books, plays and screenplays.

Personal life

Huber was previously married to Kirsten Fischer, who he has six children with.

In December 2010, he suffered a heart attack. As a self-employed actor, he had no medical insurance, however many friends and fans made donations to help cover the expenses. He has since made a full recovery.

As of 2015, Huber is engaged to Jessica Von Braun.

Filmography

Acting

	 Star Trek Continues - Leonard McCoy

Voice cast

Anime

	 A Certain Magical Index series - Aleister Crowley

	 Aria the Scarlet Ammo - Durandal

	 Attack on Titan - Petra's Father (Ep. 22)

	 Baccano! - Ronny Sukiart (The Demon)

	 Baki the Grappler - Gaia/Nomura

	 BECK: Mongolian Chop Squad - Katahira

	 Big Windup! - Tsuyoshi Shiga

	 Black Butler - Ash Landers, Master (Eps. 10-12)

	 Blassreiter - Bradley Guildford

	 Blood Blockade Battlefront - Korsakov Ulchenko (Ep. 3)

	 Blue Gender - Seamus Han

	 Burst Angel - Anthony Wong

	 C - Control - Money and Soul of Possibility - Sato's Boss (Eps. 3, 5, 9, 11)

	 Case Closed - Kenneth/Mareun Bludcraven

	 Case Closed: The Fourteenth Target - Kevin Simms

	 Chaos;Head - Issei Hatano

	 Claymore - Father Vincent

	 Corpse Princess - Ooyatsuka (Ep. 10)

	 D.Gray-Man - Reever Wenham

	 Darker than Black - Eric Nishijima

	 Dragon Age: Dawn of the Seeker - Frenic

	 Dragon Ball series - Android 17, Emperor Pilaf, Garlic Jr., Kibito, Master Shen

	 Dragon Ball Z: Battle of Gods - Emperor Pilaf

	 Dragon Ball Z: Resurrection 'F' - Emperor Pilaf

	 Dragonaut: The Resonance - Wilhelm

	 Eureka Seven: AO - Christophe Blanc

	 Fafner in the Azure: Heaven and Earth - Tamotsu Kodate

	 Fairy Tail - Bluenote Stinger, Mayor (Ep. 201)

	 Fullmetal Alchemist - Shou Tucker

	 Fullmetal Alchemist: Brotherhood - Shou Tucker

	 Ga-Rei: Zero - Kiriya Konparu (Ep. 1)

	 Ghost Hunt - Eijiro Yoshimi

	 Ghost in the Shell: Arise - Brinda

	 Glass Fleet - Hector

	 Gunslinger Girl - Dr. Bianchi

	 Hell Girl - Tadashi Inagaki

	 Hetalia Axis Powers - Austria (aka Roderich Edelstein)

	 Initial D - Yuichi Tachibana (Funimation dub)

	 Kaze no Stigma - Yuji Tsuwabuki

	 Kodocha - Tanaka

	 La storia della Arcana Famiglia - Jolly

	 Lupin the Third: The Woman Called Fujiko Mine - Shitoto Chandra (Eps. 8, 12)

	 Michiko and Hatchin - Bruno (Ep. 7)

	 Murder Princess - Dominikov

	 Mushishi - Adashino

	 Nabari no Ou - Masami Yamase

	 Negima! - Eishun Konoe

	 Oh! Edo Rocket - Nishinosuke Akai

	 One Piece - Mohji, Koshiro

	 Ouran High School Host Club - Dr. Yabu

	 Panty & Stocking with Garterbelt - Terao (Ep. 5B)

	 Red Data Girl - Professor Sōda

	 Robotics;Notes - Toshiyuki Sawada

	 The Rolling Girls - Kokichi Otowa (Ep. 5)

	 Rosario + Vampire series - The Bus Driver

	 Samurai 7 - The Imperial Envoy

	 Sands of Destruction - Rigolet (Ep. 6)

	 School Rumble - Maasaki Mitsui

	 Sekirei - Hiroto Minaka

	 Sengoku Basara: Samurai Kings series - Maeda Toshiie

	 Sgt. Frog - Kululu

	 Shakugan no Shana - Kantaro Sakai (Seasons 2-3), Mammon (Season 3), Tenmoku Ikko (Season 3)

	 Shangri-La - Karin's Father

	 Shiki - Muto (Toru's Father)

	 Shin-chan - Hiro Nohara (Shin's Father)

	 Shuffle!  - Mikio Fuyou

	 Soul Eater - Dr. Stein

	 Space Dandy - Dr. H (Ep. 9) 

	 Speed Grapher - The Jeweler

	 Spice and Wolf - Liebert

	 Strain: Strategic Armored Infantry - Brad Radofrics

	 Summer Wars - Riichi Jinnouchi

	 Suzuka - Yamato's Father

	 Tokyo Ghoul - Asaki Fueguchi

	 Toriko - Acacia

	 The Tower of Druaga - Melt

	 Trinity Blood - Father Vaclav Havel

	 Yu Yu Hakusho - Hiei

Film

	 Alien vs Ninja

Web series

	 Death Battle - Iron Man

	 Mr. CreepyPasta's Storytime: Jason the ToyMaker - Jason the ToyMaker

Video games

	 Aeon Flux - Oren Goodchild, Erskine, Soldiers, Announcers

	 Borderlands 2 - Bagman, Barlo Gutter, Creepy Bandit, Ennis Cutter, Hackson Moore, Hark Gutter, Hyperion President, Marauder Ripper, Matchstick, Mick Zaford, Sarcastic Clapper, Shin Gutter, Ulysses

	Borderlands: The Pre-Sequel! - Tassiter

	 Comic Jumper: The Adventures of Captain Smiley - Pling Pling, Villagers of Nerthus, Museum Security Guards, "I Love U" (vocals)

	 Dragon Ball series - Android 17, Emperor Pilaf, Garlic Jr.

	 Fullmetal Alchemist 2: Curse of the Crimson Elixir - Arlon Glostner (Young), Customer

	 Ghostbusters: The Video Game - Stay Puft Marshmallow brand representative 

	 The Walking Dead: Survival Instinct - Jess Collins, Ash

	  Smite - Ra, God of the Sun

	 Killing Floor 2 - Doktor Hans Volter

Crew

	 Baccano! - ADR script writer and director

	 Baka and Test - ADR script writer

	 Dragon Ball Z (Season 1 Re-dub) - ADR script writer and director

	 Dragonaut: The Resonance - ADR script writer

	 Hetalia: Axis Powers - ADR script writer

	 Oh! Edo Rocket - ADR script writer

	 Ookami-san and her Seven Companions - ADR script writer

	 One Piece - ADR script writer

	 Princess Jellyfish - ADR script writer

	 Sasami: Magical Girls Club - ADR director

	 Spice and Wolf II - ADR script writer

	 Strike Witches - ADR script writer

	 The Tower of Druaga: Sword of Uruk - ADR director

Books

	 


