
#Article: Brooke Mueller
#Type: regular article

Brooke Jaye Mueller (born August 19, 1977) is an American actress and real estate investor. She is a former wife of actor Charlie Sheen. 

Early life

Mueller was born and raised in upstate New York. Her father, Allen Mueller, worked as a Miami and Key West police officer, a high school teacher, a real-estate broker, and a part-time minister. He died in a motorcycle accident when Brooke was twelve. Her father was Lutheran and her mother, Moira Roskin Fiore, was Jewish. When Brooke was 14, her mother married Florida-based millionaire Kenneth Wolofsky and moved to Florida. Mueller was a cheerleader at the Benjamin School in Palm Beach, Florida. Mueller has a brother, Scott Allen Mueller, and a half-sister Sydney Wolofsky. Mueller's mother Moira Mueller Wolofsky Fiore is currently married to New York lounge singer Jon Fiore. While attending the Benjamin School for highschool, Mueller was on the cheerleading squad.

Career

Mueller has acted in film and worked as special correspondent on Extra. Mueller's best known role was as Janet in the 1999 direct-to-video film Witchouse, credited as Brooke Allen. She also played Cassandra in the 2008 comedy film Strictly Sexual (also credited as Brooke Allen). In 2011, Mueller co-starred in The World According to Paris, a reality show. She has also worked as real estate investor, including purchasing a home from Mel B in 2012, refurbishing it and reselling it nine months later for a $500,000 profit. She had also bought and flipped homes in the Los Angeles area neighborhoods Nichols Canyon (2005) and Los Feliz (2009).

Personal life

On May 30, 2008, Mueller married actor Charlie Sheen, having been engaged since 2007. The couple were introduced in 2006 by mutual friend Rebecca Gayheart. Mueller gave birth to their twin sons, Bob and Max, on March 14, 2009.  On December 25, 2009, Sheen was arrested on suspicion of domestic abuse. The couple filed for divorce in November 2010. In March 2011, police removed the children from Sheen's home after Mueller obtained a restraining order against Sheen. The divorce was approved by a Los Angeles Superior Court judge and became effective on May 2, 2011, and the two maintained a friendship afterwards. Mueller is friends with Kathy and Paris Hilton.

In 1996, Mueller was arrested on DUI charges in Palm Beach County, Florida. In March 2001, Mueller was arrested in Miami-Dade County, Florida for cocaine possession. In July 2011, Mueller completed an outpatient rehab program. "Brooke has decided to remove herself from the media spotlight, so she can focus on her recovery without distraction. Brooke's goal is to maintain her sobriety, and she believes this is the best option to reach that goal," her representative said in a statement. In 2013 officials took Mueller's children on a warrant and custody was ultimately given to her brother Scott Mueller (though they remained living with their mother alongside Mr. Mueller). Full custody of her children was returned to her by the court in December 2014.

Filmography


