
#Article: Kim Zolciak
#Type: regular article

Kimberleigh "Kim" Zolciak-Biermann (born Kimberleigh Marie Zolciak; May 19, 1978) is an American television personality. In 2008, she rose to prominence as one of the original housewives that appeared on the reality television series The Real Housewives of Atlanta aired on Bravo.

Zolciak left The Real Housewives of Atlanta in 2012 during the fifth season of the series. Earlier that year, she received her own spin-off show entitled Don't Be Tardy for the Wedding, which focused on the preparation of her wedding to football player Kroy Biermann. The series was subsequently renewed for a second season with a shortened title, Don't Be Tardy. The fourth season of the show premiered on August 16, 2015. In 2015, she was one of the contestants of the 21st season of the dancing competition series Dancing with the Stars.

Early life

Kim Zolciak was born in Pensacola, Florida, to a military family, and grew up in Windsor Locks, Connecticut. Her parents are Joseph and Karen, and she has a brother named Michael. She is of Italian descent and was raised Roman Catholic.

At 17, Zolciak had an affair with a 49-year-old Windsor Locks police sergeant who had interviewed her as a material witness in a criminal investigation, resulting in a 45-day suspension of the sergeant, who retired two years later. She graduated from East Catholic High School in Manchester, Connecticut in 1996, and studied nursing at the University of Connecticut. At 21, she moved to Atlanta, Georgia, where her parents had moved, and eventually settled in the suburb of Johns Creek.

Television appearances

Zolciak first appeared on the reality television series The Real Housewives of Atlanta, airing on Bravo, on October 7, 2008. Between seasons four and five, Zolciak and her then fiancé were the subject of a spinoff show, Don't Be Tardy for the Wedding, chronicling Zolciak's wedding preparations. Zolciak left Real Housewives in the middle of the fifth season, with her final episode airing December 9, 2012. Don't Be Tardy for the Wedding, later renamed to Don't Be Tardy..., is in its fourth season as of 2015.

Zolciak was scheduled to star in a new reality show on Bravo with fellow The Real Housewives cast member, NeNe Leakes, called NeNe and Kim: The Road to Riches. However, the network later decided not to move forward with the show.

Zolciak competed on the 21st season of the dancing competition show Dancing with the Stars. She was paired with professional dancer Tony Dovolani. She withdrew in September 2015, three weeks into the competition, because of a transient ischemic attack.

Musical career

In 2008 Zolciak began work on a country music album. She released a debut single, the dance track "Tardy for the Party," in 2009, followed by a remix EP the following year.

On March 12, 2013, Zolciak's Real Housewives of Atlanta castmate, Kandi Burruss, and her collaborating songwriter/producer, Rodney "Don Vito" Richard, filed suit against Zolciak for profits earned from "Tardy for the Party". In the documents filed, Burruss' attorney, RHOA castmate Phaedra Parks, alleges her clients wrote the song for Zolciak and that Zolciak released and sold the single "without the plaintiffs' authorization, license or consent." Burruss was also seeking a temporary restraining order to prevent future sales of the song and the "destruction of all copies of the infringing single and any other product of defendant's that infringe plaintiffs' copyrights", punitive damages, attorney's fees, and a jury trial.

Personal life

Zolciak has two daughters from previous relationships, Brielle and Ariana. She was married to Dan Toce from 2001 to 2003.

Zolciak said in March 2010 that she is bisexual and that she and DJ Tracy Young were in a romantic relationship.

In May 2010, Zolciak met Atlanta Falcons football player Kroy Biermann at the charity event Dancing with Atlanta Stars. Their meeting was later shown on season three of The Real Housewives of Atlanta. The couple wed at their Roswell, Georgia, home on November 11, 2011. They have four children together: Kroy Jagger (KJ), Kash, and twins Kane and Kaia.

In March 2013, Kroy Biermann filed to adopt Zolciak's daughters. The girls subsequently changed their names to Brielle and Ariana Biermann.

Discography

Singles


