
#Article: Julian McMahon
#Type: regular article

Julian Dana William McMahon (; born 27 July 1968) is an Australian actor and model.

McMahon won recognition for his roles in Television dramas, in portrayals of Ben Lucini in the award-winning Australian soap drama Home and Away, and as Christian Troy in the award-winning American drama Nip/Tuck, as well as his appearance in films with leading and supporting roles, in films such as the romantic-drama Magenta (1996), the action-superhero Fantastic Four franchise (2005 & 2007), the action-comedy film Red (2010), and the horror-thriller Bait (2012). However, his work in television with Nip/Tuck garnered him more success. The series won an Emmy Award and a Golden Globe. McMahon played the lead role in Nip/Tuck alongside Dylan Walsh throughout the entire series' run. 

Early life

McMahon was born in Sydney, the son of Lady Sonia McMahon (née Hopkins), a socialite and fashion icon, and Sir William McMahon, a prominent Australian politician. His father was a Member of the Australian Parliament and a high-ranking minister in the 24-year Liberal Government for many years before Julian's birth; he became the 20th Prime Minister of Australia in March 1971, when Julian was two years old. His mother left their three children in the care of a nanny to be with her husband in Canberra during his premiership. He has an older sister, Melinda, and a younger sister, Deborah. McMahon is of Irish descent through his father.

McMahon was educated at the private, boys-only, Sydney Grammar School,, which his father had attended. He briefly studied law at the University of Sydney and economics at the University of Wollongong. McMahon found no interest his studies at the university, and began a modelling career. He became known as a model in various fashion capitals throughout the world, such as Milan, London, New York City, Rome, and Paris.

In addition to his modelling, he began an acting career in commercials, including one for Levi Strauss jeans. From 1989 to 1991, McMahon starred in the successful Australian television soap opera Home and Away, playing the soldier Ben Lucini, alongside Dannii Minogue, his future wife (now ex-wife). He was also one of several Home and Away cast members to star in a stage musical about the soap, which toured the United Kingdom in 1991. McMahon has also appeared as Christian Troy in the entire 100-episode series of the American drama series, Nip/Tuck, which was nominated for 45 awards, and won a Golden Globe and an Emmy Award.

Career

McMahon appeared in the film Wet and Wild Summer! (aka Exchange Lifeguards) in 1992, and appeared with his then soon-to-be wife Dannii Minogue's music videos for her 1993 hits "This Is It" and "This Is the Way". His first role on American television was on the daytime soap opera Another World, playing Ian Rain from 1993 to 1995. He also went on to play Dr. Michael Walsh in the movie Magenta in 1996, Sheriff Hayes in In Quiet Night (aka You Belong to Me Forever) in 1998, George Simian in the psychological thriller Chasing Sleep in 2000, and David Cameron in the made-for-TV movie Another Day in 2001.

From 1996 to 2000, he starred in all four seasons of the NBC drama Profiler as Agent John Grant. Then McMahon joined the cast of the WB's supernatural hit show Charmed, playing the conflicted half-demon/half-human Cole Turner from 2000 to 2003; he returned for one episode in 2005. Following Charmed, McMahon's next role was playboy plastic surgeon Christian Troy on the FX series Nip/Tuck. He was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Television Series Drama in 2005 for his performance.

During this time, McMahon also portrayed supervillain Doctor Doom in Fantastic Four, the 2005 film adaptation of the comic book series of the same name. The film was a box office success, and McMahon reprised his role as Doom in the sequel in 2007.

He appeared alongside Sandra Bullock in the 2007 supernatural thriller Premonition. He co-starred in 2011 with Milla Jovovich in Julien Magnat's thriller Faces in the Crowd.

Personal life

McMahon jokingly noted in an interview that his mother was "a very scary lady", because she would visit him on the set of his films and patronise him whenever he finished filming a scene.

McMahon married former Home and Away co-star Dannii Minogue in January 1994, and divorced in mid-1995, after less than two years of marriage. Referring to the divorce, Minogue stated that it was her "biggest regret and biggest downfall", and later posed nude in an Australian edition of Playboy, commenting "I just had a marriage break-up. Most women go to the hairdressers - I did Playboy. I chose the photographer, the location, what I did or didn't want to wear and everything else about the pictures. I found it a really liberating, empowering experience". The edition featuring Minogue sold out in under four days and became one of the best-selling editions in Australia. After their divorce, Minogue had a very public falling out with McMahon's mother when she (Lady McMahon) said that "Minogue was not worthy of marrying into her family".

In 1999, McMahon married former Baywatch star Brooke Burns. They have one child but divorced in 2001. In 2014, at Lake Tahoe, California, McMahon was married for the third time, to his girlfriend of 11 years, Kelly Paniagua, after having been engaged for six months.

Filmography

Awards and nominations


