
#Article: Sally Jewell
#Type: regular article

Sarah Margaret Roffey Jewell (born February 21, 1956) is an American businesswoman and the 51st United States Secretary of the Interior, serving in the administration of President Barack Obama. She is the second woman to hold the position, after Gale Norton. The former president and CEO of REI, a Seattle-based retailer of outdoor gear, she studied as an engineer, and previously worked in the oil and banking industries.

Early life and education

Jewell was born in London, England, UK as Sally Margaret Roffey, the daughter of Anne (née Murphy) and Peter Roffey. She moved to the United States at age 3 in 1959, when her father, an anesthesiologist, took up a fellowship at the University of Washington. She graduated in 1973 from Renton High School and, in 1978, was awarded a degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Washington.

Career

Jewell worked for Mobil oil company on oil fields in Oklahoma from 1978 through 1981, when she joined Rainier Bank. She worked in banking for twenty years, staying with Security Pacific, which acquired Rainier Bank, until 1992, and working for WestOne Bank from 1992 through 1995, and for Washington Mutual from 1995 through 2000. In 1996, she joined the board of REI and in 2000 was named chief operating officer. In 2005, she succeeded Dennis Madsen as chief executive officer (CEO).

Jewell has sat on the boards of Premera, the National Parks Conservation Association, and the University of Washington Board of Regents.  She helped found the Mountains to Sound Greenway Trust.

In 2009, Jewell received the National Audubon Society's Rachel Carson Award for her leadership in and dedication to conservation. The Rachel Carson Award honors visionary women whose expertise and dedication advance conservation locally and nationally.

Jewell was named the Puget Sound Business Journal CEO of the Year in 2006.

Personal life

Jewell is married to Warren Jewell, who is also an engineer. They have two adult children and reside in Seattle.

In her spare time, Jewell enjoys snowboarding and kayaking. She has also climbed Vinson Massif, the highest mountain in Antarctica.

She started making campaign contributions in 2008 and gave almost "solely to Democratic candidates" according to USA Today.

Secretary of the Interior

On February 6, 2013, Jewell was nominated by President Barack Obama to succeed Ken Salazar as United States Secretary of the Interior. Her nomination was approved by the United States Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources on March 21, with only three of the committee's 22 members opposed.

On April 10, 2013, the Senate confirmed Jewell to be Secretary of the Interior in an 87-11 vote. Because she acquired her U.S. citizenship by naturalization rather than being a natural-born citizen, Jewell is not eligible to hold a place within the presidential line of succession.


