
#Article: Kipp Hamilton
#Type: regular article

Kipp Hamilton (August 16, 1935  -  January 29, 1981) was an American actress, singer and model. She was the younger sister of producer Joe Hamilton and the sister-in-law of Carol Burnett.

Early life and family

She was born Rita Marie Hamilton in Los Angeles, California, the youngest of six children. One her older brothers was producer and actor Joe Hamilton who later married comedian Carol Burnett.

Career

Hamilton made her film debut in a supporting role in the RKO Radio Pictures drama On Our Very Own. In March 1953, she was named "Miss Optometry" by the New York State Association of Optometrists. In mid-1955, Hamilton signed a seven-year contract with 20th Century Fox. Shortly after signing with Fox, Hamilton (along with nine other up-and-coming actresses including Anita Ekberg and Lori Nelson) was named a "Deb Star of 1955". That same year, Hamilton was cast in her first major role in the drama Good Morning, Miss Dove, playing Jincey Baker.

The following year, Hamilton asked to be released from her contract with Fox. Throughout the remainder of the 1950s, Hamilton appeared in guest roles on Perry Mason, Meet McGraw, Richard Diamond, Private Detective, The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp, The Texan and 77 Sunset Strip. In 1959, Hamilton appeared in a supporting role opposite Frank Sinatra in Never So Few. Later that same year, she signed with Hecht Hill Lancaster (the production company partially owned by actor Burt Lancaster) and was cast in the Western The Unforgiven (1960). In addition to television work, Hamilton also had a nightclub act that she performed at Lou Black's Living Room, a club in Montreal.

In November 1963, Hamilton began touring in the road production of the musical How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying. She remained with the production until mid-1964. In 1965, she returned to television with the guest starring role on the Bewitched episode "Pleasure O'Reilly" in which she played the title character. The following year, Henry G. Saperstein cast Hamilton in what would be her final film role, a singer in the Japanese Kaiju movie, The War of the Gargantuas. Billed as a "Special Guest Star", Hamilton performs the song "The Words Get Stuck In My Throat" which was later covered by Devo. Hamilton's final onscreen role was in a 1967 episode of the Western The Virginian.

Personal life

In 1958, Hamilton dated and later became engaged to film mogul Adolph Zukor's son Eugene (also known as Adolph Zukor III), an executive at Paramount Pictures. Hamilton called off the engagement in March 1959 while she was filming The Unforgiven in Durango, Mexico.

In February 1962, Hamilton married director David Geisel whom she had met on the set of The Garry Moore Show which her brother Joe produced. They had a daughter, Marie, in 1963 and separated the following year. They were divorced in June 1965. Geisel died in June 1969.

Later years and death

After retiring from acting, Hamilton married Beverly Hills lawyer Donald Thorman Rosenfeld in February 1968. They had a daughter, Dana, in October 1968. They remained married until Hamilton's death from breast cancer on January 29, 1981.

Filmography

See also


