
#Article: Robert Bass
#Type: regular article

Robert Muse Bass (born 1948) is an American businessman and philanthropist. He is the chairman of Aerion Corporation, an American aerospace firm in Reno, Nevada. Bass was worth approximately $5.5 billion in 2007, and $4 billion in 2010 on oil and other investments

Early life

Robert Muse Bass was born in 1948 in Fort Worth, Texas. His father, Perry Richardson Bass, was an heir and investor. His mother, Nancy Lee Bass, was a philanthropist. He has three brothers Lee Marshall Bass, Ed Bass and Sid Bass. His uncle is Sid Richardson

Bass graduated from Yale University, where he received a bachelor of arts degree. He received a master in business administration from the Stanford Graduate School of Business.

Career

Bass co-founded Bass Brothers Enterprises with his brothers. Later, he founded the Robert M. Bass Group. Additionally, Bass serves as the chairman of Aerion Corporation and president of Keystone, Inc.. He is the founder of the Oak Hill Capital Partners.

Philanthropy

Bass is past Chairman of Stanford University, Stanford Management Company, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, and Cook Children’s Medical Center. He is a Trustee of Stanford University, a Director of Stanford Management Company, and a Trustee of Rockefeller University, Groton School, Middlesex School, and the Amon Carter Museum.

Bass and his wife Anne donated $13 million to fund the renovation of Yale's Cross Campus Library, which was renamed the Bass Library. In 2005, they donated $30 million to the Graduate School of Business. In 2013, they donated $50 million to Duke University to support Bass Connections, an initiative to encourage cross disciplinary collaboration and studies.  In 2001, Bass and his wife donated $10 million to Duke to strengthen undergraduate teaching. They also donated $10 million in 1996 to establish the Bass Society of Fellows at Duke.

Personal

Bass is married to Anne T. Bass. They have four children together. They reside in Woodside, California.


