
#Article: God Nisanov
#Type: regular article

God Semenovich Nisanov (born 24 April 1972) is a Russian billionaire property developer and philanthropist.

Early life

God Semenovich Nisanov was born in Quba, Azerbaijan, on 24 April 1972. He grew up in the Qırmızı Qəsəbə neighborhood of the city, home to the country's largest community of Mountain Jews. He was educated at the College of Finance and Credit, and received a diploma from the Baku Institute of Law in Baku, Azerbaijan.

Career

Together with his business partner, fellow Azerbaijani Zarakh Iliev, Nisanov started by building markets near metro stations in Moscow and later turned these into shopping centres. They later diversified into building hotels in Moscow and elsewhere in Russia and have real estate holdings totaling 14,000,000 sq ft. For example, they acquired the Lotus City shopping centre in suburban Moscow in 2013.

Nisanov and Iliev own the Radisson Royal Hotel and Radisson SAS Slavyanskaya Hotel in Moscow. Nisanov acquired the Radisson Royal Hotel, a luxury hotel formerly known as the Ukrainian Hotel and commissioned by Joseph Stalin, for £59 million at a 2005 auction.

Nisanov also has a minority business partner, Ilkham Ragimov, who was a classmate of Vladimir Putin.

He serves on the Board of Directors of Ooo Biskvit (also known as "Biscuit" in English), a restaurant ownership company.

Philanthropy

He serves as an honorary member of the Board of Directors of the International Fund for Cooperation and Partnership of the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea (BSCSIF), a non-profit organization which fosters philanthropic cooperation between countries along the coasts of the Black and Caspian Seas. He has been an attendee of the Baku International Humanitarian Forum. In July 2014, at a ceremony in the Kremlin, Russian President Vladimir Putin awarded Nisanov with the Order of Friendship.

Nisanov served on the Board of Trustees of The Israeli Presidential Conference in 2013. He was elected as a member of the World Jewish Congress Executive Committee in September 2014. In November 2014, he went to London as part of a delegation of the Russian Jewish Congress, alongside fellow billionaire businessmen Mikhael Mirilashvili, German Khan and Mikhail Fridman to talk about business and philanthropic ties between British Jews and Russian Jews. The trio met Ephraim Mirvis, the Chief Rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of the Commonwealth,as well as Dayan Menachem Gelley, the head of the London Beth Din. They were also joined by Pinchas Goldschmidt, the Chief Rabbi of Moscow, and Ronald Lauder, the President of the World Jewish Congress.

Personal life

He is married with three children and lives in Moscow, Russia. 


