
#Article: Moody Awori
#Type: regular article

Arthur Moody Awori (born 5 December 1927), known as "Uncle Moody", was the ninth Vice President of Kenya from 25 September 2003 to 9 January 2008.

Politics

Awori was born in Butere. He went to Mang'u High School in 1935, and later Kakamega School. Subsequently he studied at Makerere University in Uganda.

He was first elected as a Member of Parliament representing Funyula Constituency in Busia District in Western Province in 1983. Under President Daniel arap Moi, he served in several positions as assistant minister.

Awori broke with the ruling party, KANU, in 2002 and joined the National Rainbow Coalition opposition party, and is chairman of NARC’S top decision making organ. When Moi was succeeded by Mwai Kibaki, Awori was made Minister of Home Affairs in January 2003 and then Vice-President (while remaining in charge of Home Affairs) in September 2003, following the death of the previous Vice-President, Michael Kijana Wamalwa, in London.

In the December 2007 parliamentary election he lost his seat in Parliament. On 8 January 2008, Kibaki named Kalonzo Musyoka to replace Awori as Vice-President and Minister of Home Affairs, and Awori handed over the office on 9 January. Awori, describing Musyoka as "a friend and political son", said that he believed Musyoka was "equal to the task", while Musyoka said that he had "deep respect" for Awori, who he called "a true gentleman".

Personal

A devout Roman Catholic, Awori is married to Rose Awori. The couple has five adult children - two sons and three daughters - and grandchildren.

His older brother, W.W.W. Awori, served on the Legislative Council in the 1950s. His younger brother Aggrey Awori is a politician in Uganda who came third in the presidential elections of 2001. His sister, Mary Okello, is a founder and CEO of the Makini Schools.

Anglo Leasing

He has recently been implicated in the Anglo Leasing scandal in a report published on 22 January 2006 by John Githongo. He has insisted upon his innocence and refused to resign, saying he saw no reason to. In February 2006 eighty Members of Parliament demanded his resignation, threatening street protests if their requests were not met. A few days later protestors on the streets of Nairobi called for his resignation as part of a wider anti-corruption demonstration. After this was not achieved, the Social Reform Centre said that he was undermining the integrity of his office in refusing to step down and promised to continue protesting. In a February 22 interview with the Public Accounts Committee Awori blamed civil servants, claiming to have been misled and that he had had nothing to do with any wrongdoing.

Awards

He is also the founder chairman of the Association for the Physically Disabled of Kenya, and a member of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries.

He holds an honorary doctor of laws degree from the Southern New Hampshire University in the United States of America. He was awarded the degree in May 2004 in recognition of his many years of dedicated service to the disadvantaged in society, particularly the disabled and the poor.tute of Secretaries.

In recognition of his outstanding contribution to the nation and the society in general, the Kenyan Government decorated him with two high level State awards - Elder of the Burning Spear (EBS) and Elder of the Golden Heart (EGH).


