
#Article: Ali Mazrui
#Type: regular article

Ali Al'amin Mazrui (24 February 1933 - 12 October 2014), was an academic professor, and political writer on African and Islamic studies and North-South relations. He was born in Mombasa, Kenya. He was an Albert Schweitzer Professor in the Humanities and the Director of the Institute of Global Cultural Studies at Binghamton University in Binghamton, New York.  

Early Life

Mazrui was born on 24 February 1933 in Mombasa, Kenya Colony. He was the son of Al-Amin Bin Ali Mazrui, the Chief Islamic Judge in Kadhi courts of Kenya Colony. Mazrui initially intended to follow the path of his father as an Islamist and pursue his study in Al-Azhar University in Egypt.  Due to poor performance in the Cambridge School Certificate examination in 1949, Mazrui was rejected entry to Makerere College (now Makerere University), the only tertiary education institute in East Africa at that time. He then worked in the Mombasa Institute of Muslim Education (now Technical University of Mombasa).

Education

After getting a Kenyan Government scholarship, Mazrui furthered his study and obtained his B.A. with Distinction from Manchester University in Great Britain in 1960, his M.A. from Columbia University in New York in 1961, and his doctorate (DPhil) from Oxford University (Nuffield College) in 1966. He was influenced by Kwame Nkrumah's ideas of pan-Africanism and consciencism, which formed the backbone of his discussion on Africa's Triple Heritage (Africanity, Islam and Christianity).

Early career

Upon completing his education at Oxford University, Mazrui joined Makerere University (Kampala, Uganda), where he served as head of the Department of Political Science and Dean of the Faculty of Social Sciences. He served at Makerere University until 1973, when he was forced into exile by Idi Amin. In 1974, he joined the faculty of the University of Michigan as professor and later was appointed the Director of the Center for Afroamerican and African Studies (1978-81). In 1989, he was appointed to the faculty of Binghamton University, State University of New York as the Albert Schweitzer Professor in the Humanities and the Director of the Institute of Global Cultural Studies (IGCS).

International acclaim

In addition to his appointments as the Albert Schweitzer Professor in the Humanities, Professor in Political Science, African Studies, Philosophy, Interpretation and Culture and the Director of the Institute of Global Cultural Studies (IGCS), Mazrui also holds three concurrent faculty appointments as Albert Luthuli Professor-at-Large in the Humanities and Development Studies at the University of Jos in Nigeria, Andrew D. White Professor-at-Large Emeritus and Senior Scholar in Africana Studies at Cornell University, Ithaca, New York and Chancellor of the Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology, Nairobi, Kenya. In 1999, Mazrui retired as the inaugural Walter Rodney Professor at the University of Guyana, Georgetown, Guyana. Mazrui has also been a Visiting Scholar at Stanford University, The University of Chicago, Colgate University, McGill University, National University of Singapore, Oxford University, Harvard University, Bridgewater State College, Ohio State University, and at other institutions in Cairo, Australia, Leeds, Nairobi, Teheran, Denver, London, Baghdad, and Sussex, amongst others. In 2005, Ali Mazrui was selected as the 73rd topmost intellectual person in the world on the list of Top 100 Public Intellectuals by Prospect Magazine (UK) and Foreign Policy (United States).

Professional organizations

In addition to his academic appointments, Mazrui also served as President of the African Studies Association (USA) and as Vice-President of the International Political Science Association and has also served as Special Advisor to the World Bank. He has also served on the Board of the American Muslim Council, Washington, D.C.

Works

Mazrui's research interests included African politics, international political culture, political Islam and North-South relations. He is author or co-author of more than twenty books. Mazrui has also published hundreds of articles in major scholastic journals and for public media. He has also served on the editorial boards of more than twenty international scholarly journals. Mazrui was widely consulted by heads of states and governments, international media and research institutions for political strategies and alternative thoughts.

He first rose to prominence as a critic of some of the accepted orthodoxies of African intellectuals in the 1960s and 1970s. He was critical of African socialism and all strains of Marxism. He argued that communism was a Western import just as unsuited for the African condition as the earlier colonial attempts to install European type governments. He argued that a revised liberalism could help the continent and described himself as a proponent of a unique ideology of African liberalism.

At the same time he was a prominent critic of the current world order. He believed the current capitalist system was deeply exploitative of Africa, and that the West rarely if ever lived up to their liberal ideals and could be described as global apartheid. He has opposed Western interventions in the developing world, such as the Iraq War. He has also long been opposed to many of the policies of Israel, being one of the first to try to link the treatment of Palestinians with South Africa's apartheid.

Especially in recent years, Mazrui has also become a well known commentator on Islam and Islamism. While rejecting violence and terrorism Mazrui has praised some of the anti-imperialist sentiment that plays an important role in modern Islamic fundamentalism. He has also argued, controversially, that sharia law is not incompatible with democracy.

In addition to his written work, Mazrui was also the creator of the television series The Africans: A Triple Heritage, which was jointly produced by the BBC and the Public Broadcasting Service (WETA, Washington) in association with the Nigerian Television Authority, and funded by the Annenberg/CPB Project. A book by the same title was jointly published by BBC Publications and Little, Brown and Company.

Positions held

	 Director, Institute of Global Cultural Studies, Binghamton University, State University of New York, Binghamton, New York, U.S.A.

	 Albert Schweitzer Professor in the Humanities, Binghamton University, State University of New York, Binghamton, New York, U.S.A.

	 Professor of Political Science,African Studies and Philosophy, Interpretation and Culture, Binghamton University, State University of New York, Binghamton, New York, U.S.A.

	 Chancellor, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology, Nairobi, Kenya

	 Albert Luthuli Professor-at-Large, University of Jos, Jos, Nigeria

	 Senior Scholar in Africana Studies and Andrew D. White Professor-at-Large Emeritus, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, U.S.A.

	 2008-2009 M. Thelma McAndless Distinguished scholar, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, MI, U.S.A.

	 President, Association of Muslim Social Scientists of North America, Washington D.C.

Membership of organizations (1980-1995)

	 Fellow, African Academy of Sciences

	 Member, Pan-African Advisory Council to UNICEF (The United Nations' Children's Fund)

	 Vice-President, World Congress of Black Intellectuals

	 Member, United Nations Commission on Transnational Corporations

	 Distinguished Visiting Professor, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, U.S.A. (Spring)

	 Member, Bank's Council of African Advisors, The World Bank (Washington, D.C.)

	 Vice-President, International African Institute, London, England

	 Member of the Advisory Board of Directors of the Detroit Chapter, Africare

Media

	 Featured in 2010 film Motherland, directed by Owen Alik Shahadah, featuring key academics from around the continent of Africa.Ali Mazrui in Motherland film

	 Main African consultant and on-screen respondent, "A History Denied" in the television series on Lost Civilizations (NBC and Time-Life, 1996), U.S.A.

	 "The Bondage of Boundaries: Towards Redefining Africa", in the 150th anniversary issue of The Economist (London) (September 1993), Vol. 328, No. 7828.

	 Author and narrator, The Africans: A Triple Heritage, BBC and PBS television series in cooperation with Nigerian Television Authority, 1986, funded by the Annenberg/CPB Project.

	 Author and broadcaster, The African Condition, BBC Reith Radio Lectures, 1979, with book of the same title (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1980)

	 Advisor to the award-winning, PBS-broadcast documentary Muhammad: Legacy of a Prophet (2002), produced by Unity Productions Foundation.

Mazrui was a regular contributor to newspapers in Kenya, Uganda, and South Africa, most notably the Daily Nation (Nairobi), The Standard (Nairobi), the Daily Monitor (Kampala) and, and the City Press (Johannesburg).

Awards

	 Millennium Tribute for Outstanding Scholarship, House of Lords, Parliament Buildings, London, June 2000

	 Special Award from the Association of Muslim Social Scientists (United Kingdom), honoring Mazrui for his contribution to the social sciences and Islamic studies, June 2000

	 Honorary Doctorate of Letters from various universities for fields which include Divinity, Humane Letters, and the Sciences of Development

	 Icon of the Twentieth Century, elected by Lincoln University, Pennsylvania, 1998

	 Appointed Walter Rodney Professor, University of Guyana, Georgetown, Guyana, 1998

	 Icon of the Twentieth Century Award, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania, 1998

	 DuBois-Garvey Award for Pan-African Unity, Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland, 1998

	 Appointed Ibn-Khaldun Professor-at-Large, School of Islamic and Social Sciences, Leesburg, Virginia, 1997-2001

	 Distinguished Faculty Achievement Award, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1988

	 Appointed Distinguished Andrew D. White Professor-at-Large, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA (1986-1992)

Mazrui was ranked among the world's top 100 public intellectuals by readers of Prospect Magazine (UK) Foreign Policy Magazine (Washington, D.C.) (see The 2005 Global Intellectuals Poll).

Death

According to press reports, Mazurui had not been feeling well for several months prior to his death. He died of natural causes at his home in Vestal in New York on Sunday, 12 October 2014. His body was repatriated to his hometown Mombasa and it arrived early morning on Sunday 19 October. It was taken to the family home where it was washed as per Islamic custom. The funeral prayer was held at the Mbaruk Mosque in Old Town and he was laid to rest at the family's Mazrui Graveyard opposite Fort Jesus. His burial was attended by Cabinet Secretary Najib Balala, Majority Leader Aden Bare Duale, Governor Hassan Ali Joho; and Senators Hassan Omar and Abu Chiaba

Publications

	2008: Islam in Africa's Experience Ali Mazrui, Patrick Dikirr, Robert Ostergard Jr., Michael Toler and Paul Macharia (New Delhi: Sterling Paperbacks).

	2008: Euro-Jews and Afro-Arabs: The Great Semitic Divergence in History Seifudein Adem, (Washington DC: University of America Press).

	2008: The Politics of War and Culture of Violence Seifudein Adem and Abdul Bemath, (New Jersey: Africa World Press).

	2008: Globalization and Civilization: Are they Forces in Conflict? Ali Mazrui, Patrick Dikirr, Shalahudin Kafrawi, (New York: Global Academic Publications).

	2006: A Tale of two Africas: Nigeria and South Africa as contrasting Visions James N. Karioki (London: Adonis & Abbey).

	2006: Islam: Between Globalization & Counter-Terrorism Shalahudin Kafrawi, Alamin M. Mazrui and Ruzima Sebuharara (Trenton, NJ and Asmara, Eritrea: Africa World Press).

	2004: The African Predicament and the American Experience: a Tale of two Edens (Westport, CT and London: Praeger).

	2004: Almin M. Mazrui and Willy M. Mutunga (eds). Race, Gender, and Culture Conflict: Mazrui and His Critics (Trenton, New Jersey: Africa World Press).

	2003: Almin M. Mazrui and Willy M. Mutunga (eds). Governance and Leadership:Debating the African Condition (Trenton, New Jersey: Africa World Press).

	2002: Black Reparations in the era of Globalization Alamin Mazrui (Binghamton: The Institute of Global Cultural Studies).

	2002: The Titan of Tanzania: Julius K. Nyerere's Legacy (Binghamton: The Institute of Global Cultural Studies).

	2002: Africa and other Civilizations: Conquest and Counter-Conquest, The Collected Essays of Ali A. Mazrui, Vol. 2 editor: Toyin Falola; editors: Ricardo Rene Laremont & Fouad Kalouche (Trenton, NJ and Asmara, Eritrea: Africa World Press)

	2002: Africanity Redefined, The Collected Essays of Ali A. Mazrui, Vol. 1 Editor: Toyin Falola; Editors: Ricardo Rene Laremont & Tracia Leacock Seghatolislami (Trenton, NJ, and Asmara,Eritrea: Africa World Press).

	1999: Political Culture of Language: Swahili, Society and the State Alamin M. Mazrui (Binghamton: The Institute of Global Cultural Studies).

	1999: The African Diaspora: African Origins and New World Identities Isidore Okpewho and Carole Boyce Davies (Bloomington: Indiana University Press).

	1998: The Power of Babel: Language and Governance in the African Experience Alamin M. Mazrui (Oxford and Chicago: James Currey and University of Chicago Press).

	1995: Swahili, State and Society: The Political Economy of an African Language Alamin M. Mazrui (Nairobi: East African Educational Publishers).

	1993: Africa since 1935: VOL. VIII of UNESCO General History of Africa asst. ed. C. Wondji (London: Heinemann and Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993).

	1990: Cultural Forces in World Politics (London and Portsmouth, N.H: James Currey and Heinemann).

	1986: The Africans: A Triple Heritage (New York: Little Brown and Co., and London: BBC).

	1986: The Africans: A Reader Senior Editor T.K. Levine (New York: Praeger).

	1984: Nationalism and New States in Africa: From about 1935 to the Present Michael Tidy (Heinemann Educational Books, London).

	1980: The African Condition: A Political Diagnosis Reith Lectures (London: Heinemann Educational Books. and New York: Cambridge University Press).

	1978: The Warrior Tradition in Modern Africa editor (The Hague and Leiden, The Netherlands: E.J. Brill Publishers).

	1978: Political Values and the Educated Class in Africa (London: Heinemann Educational Books and Berkeley, CA: University of California Press).

	1977: State of the Globe Report, 1977 (edited and co-authored for World Order Models Project)

	1977: Africa's International Relations: The Diplomacy of Dependency and Change (London: Heinemann Educational Books and Boulder: Westview Press).

	1976: A World Federation of Cultures: An African Perspective (New York: Free Press).

	1975: Soldiers and Kinsmen in Uganda: The Making of a Military Ethnocracy (Beverly Hills: Sage Publication and London).

	1975: The Political Sociology of the English Language: An African Perspective: (The Hague: Mouton Co.).

	1973: World Culture and the Black Experience (Seattle: University of Washington Press).

	1973: Africa in World Affairs: The Next Thirty Years with Hasu Patel (New York and London: The Third Press).

	1971: The Trial of Christopher Okigbo novel (London: Heinemann Educational Books and New York: The Third Press).

	1971: Cultural Engineering and Nation-Building in East Africa (Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press).

	1970: Protest and Power in Black Africa with Robert I. Rotberg (New York: Oxford University Press).

	1969: Violence and Thought: Essays on Social Tentions in Africa (London and Harlow: Longman).

	1967: Towards a Pax Africana: A Study of Ideology and Ambition (London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson, and University of Chicago Press).

	1967: On Heroes and Uhuru-Worship: Essays on Independent Africa (London: Longman).

	1967: The Anglo-African Commonwealth: Political Friction and Cultural Fusion (Oxford: Pergamon Press).


