
#Article: Victoria Osteen
#Type: regular article

Victoria Osteen (born March 28, 1961) is the co-pastor of Lakewood Church in Houston, Texas, an author, the wife of Joel Osteen, and the daughter-in-law of John Osteen.

History

Victoria Osteen was born Victoria Iloff in Huntsville, Alabama. She lived near Marshall Space Flight Center where her father, Donald Iloff - a mathematician with General Electric - was a member of GE’s Saturn rocket project team led by German rocket scientist Wernher von Braun. In 1963, at the age of two, Osteen moved with her family to Houston, Texas when her father took a position with the National Aeronautical and Space Administration (NASA). She grew up in a southern suburb of Houston, near the Manned Spacecraft Center (now known as the Johnson Space Center).

Growing up, Osteen attended the Church of Christ, a relatively conservative Protestant church, where her mother, Georgine Iloff, taught Sunday school and her father served as a deacon. Osteen attended (though did not graduate from) the University of Houston where she studied psychology while working in her mother’s jewelry business. It was while working in the jewelry store that she met Joel Osteen in 1985 when he came in to buy a new watch battery.

Current activities

Osteen founded the Lakewood Church Women’s Ministry in 2003, where she currently serves as co-pastor. Her part of the service is not broadcast throughout most of the world; however, she can be seen on a one-hour program broadcast on the Daystar Television Network and through a live internet feed.

Her other activities include a regular feature on Houston radio station 89.3 KSBJ. She also supports the organizations Feed the Children and The Bridge, a shelter for battered women.

Book publishing

Osteen’s first book, entitled Love Your Life: Living Happy, Healthy, and Whole was published by Simon & Schuster and released for sale on October 14, 2008. It debuted at number 2 on the New York Times Bestsellers list. At 750,000 copies, the initial first printing of Love Your Life was one of the largest by any publisher in 2008.

In January 2009, Osteen released children’s books published by Simon & Schuster's Little Simon imprint. Her five-year agreement with Simon & Schuster allows her to publish 13 children’s works in all, including a Bible for children.

Lawsuit

Sharon Brown, a Continental Airlines flight attendant, accused Victoria Osteen of assault before a December 19, 2005 flight from Houston, Texas to Vail, Colorado. The Osteen family was escorted off the flight, and the FAA fined Victoria Osteen $3,000 for “interfering with a crew member," which Osteen paid uncontested in order to put the incident behind her. The flight attendant subsequently filed a civil suit against Osteen, seeking an apology plus $405,000 in damages. A Houston jury sided with Osteen, clearing her of civil liability on August 13, 2008.


