
#Article: Touriya Haoud
#Type: regular article

Touriya Haoud-Vaughan (Arabic: ثريا مهاود ; Macedonian: Турија Хауд; born October 1, 1977) is a Dutch actress, model, and singer. She lives in Los Angeles, California.

Career

Soon after graduating the private Schoevers education with a communication diploma, a friend persuaded her to participate in a modeling contest which started her modeling career. She then traveled Europe for the next few years, landing European campaigns with Tommy Hilfiger and Replay.

In 2003, Haoud succeeded Naomi Campbell as one of the two new faces for the TIM campaign advertising Italy's leading telecom network. In Fall that year she also performed as the leading character in the new Campari commercial for both Italy and Germany. In spring 2004 she featured as one of the two models who appeared in the global campaign for Replay. This campaign lasted until Fall 2004.

As an international model, Haoud has appeared on the covers of Harper's Bazaar, Donna, GQ (Gentlemen's Quarterly), Max and Vogue Gioielli.

In between her modeling, Haoud took various acting classes and landed a lead role in the Dutch television series "Hartslag" (a sort of Dutch ER). She also played in two episode of the Dutch television series "Costa", but two different characters.

In the winter of 2003 she landed one of the leading roles in the Dutch independent movie Shouf Shouf Habibi! ("Look Look Baby"). She has also acted in various video clips and television shows. In 2003, Haoud released her own single "In The Name Of Love", a cover (albeit with partially changed lyrics) of Ofra Haza's "Im Nin'alu". 

Her first U.S. movie is Five Fingers, in which she plays Ryan Phillippe's fiancée Saadia. Following the wrap of shooting Five Fingers, she moved to Los Angeles in April 2005.

Personal life

Haoud was born in Rhenen, Utrecht, the Netherlands. She is of Moroccan and Macedonian descent.

On June 4, 2006, she married American actor Greg Vaughan. On May 4, 2007, Touriya gave birth to a son named Jathan James Vaughan. On January 19, 2010, Touriya gave birth to their second son, Cavan Thomas Vaughan. On Aug 24, 2011 they announced they are expecting their third child in March 2012. On March 6, 2012 Touriya gave birth to their third son, Landan Reid.

On April 14, 2014, Haoud and Vaughan announced they are splitting after 8 years of marriage.

Selected filmography


