
#Article: Tammin Sursok
#Type: regular article

Tammin Pamela Sursok (born 19 August 1983) is a South African-born Australian actress and singer-songwriter. Sursok is best known for her roles as Dani Sutherland on Home and Away, Colleen Carlton on The Young and the Restless and Jenna Marshall on Pretty Little Liars.

Career

2000-04: Home and Away

Her mother, Julie, is a classically-trained pianist and guitarist. As a result, Sursok was brought up surrounded by music. Early on, Sursok was involved with the Sydney Youth Musical Theatre where she pursued her interests in acting, music and dance. She also studied with the Trinity Speech and Drama College and graduated with a high distinction. Sursok was educated at Ravenswood School for Girls, in Gordon, Sydney, studying speech and drama in her final years of school.

In 1999, after completing Year 10, Sursok acquired an agent and received her first audition for a role in the long-running Australian drama series, Home and Away. Sursok received the role of Dani Sutherland, the rebellious eldest daughter of the Sutherland family who took over the running of the Caravan Park. The actress considered herself lucky to get the part, calling the experience "incredible". In an interview with TeenHollywood she stated, "It was my first audition, so I thought it always worked like that, and you always get your first audition, but that is not the case." Sursok's performance in the role earned her an win for the Logie Award for Most Popular New Female Talent beating out Caroline Craig, Madeleine West and Karina Brown. Sursok's performance earned her a nomination for the Logie Award for Most Popular Actress, losing out to McLeod's Daughters star Lisa Chappell.

2004-06: Whatever Will Be

Sursok left Home and Away in 2004, so she could pursue a music career and acting opportunities in the United States. "I'm 21 and it's time to be more creative. It is scary, but I had to leave before I became stale." In 2004, Sursok affirmed she was signed to Sony BMG Music Entertainment, confirming reports that recording had begun for her debut studio album.

Sursok's solo album, Whatever Will Be, was released on May 22, 2005, under Sony Music Entertainment with songwriters Savan Kotecha, David Kreuger, Marion Raven, Steve Booker; and producers John Shanks, Per Mangusson and David Kreuger. "Whatever Will Be" made its debut in the ARIA Albums Chart at number thirteen. During its second week on the charts, it remained at its peak position of #13; however, during its third week, it had a significant drop by 23 spots, landing the album at #36. During its fourth week, it fell further landing at #43. It ended its run on June 20, falling completely off the charts and had not charted since. The album's lead single, "Pointless Relationship", debuted on the ARIA Singles Chart at #7 before peaking at #5, spending 15 weeks on the charts. Upon the song's release, it quickly shot to #1 on the Australian Top 100 Radio Airplay Chart, becoming the highest charting debut single in years. "Pointless Relationship" certified Platinum in Australia. The second single, "Whatever Will Be", debuted at #13 on the ARIA Singles Chart and spent a total of 18 weeks on the charts. "Whatever Will Be" was the 98th best-selling single of 2005 in Australia. The third and final single off Whatever Will Be, "It's a Beautiful Thing", quickly debuted on the ARIA Singles chart at #30. The song peaked at #6, spending 12 weeks on the charts. "It's a Beautiful Thing" became the second most downloaded song in its debut week, behind Rob Thomas's "This Is How a Heart Breaks". It also peaked at #49 on the Australian Top 100 Radio Airplay Chart, becoming her lowest charting single.

After the success of her album, Whatever Will Be, plans were made to launch Sursok in the UK, but unexpectedly fell through due to changes at her record label. The title track, "Whatever Will Be", was covered by Vanessa Hudgens for her RIAA-certified debut album, V.

2006-present: Focus on films and television work

After her UK plans fell through, Sursok relocated from Australia to Los Angeles, California in 2006 in order to concentrate on her acting career. That same year, she made her film debut in a bit role in the film Aquamarine.

In 2007, after a successful audition, Sursok became the third actress to portray Colleen Carlton on the American soap opera television series, The Young and the Restless. Her debut was quickly met with scrutiny from a number of The Young and the Restless viewers. Despite the negativity, she received comparable positive viewer feedback. "The fans have been really great." In preparation for the role, Sursok tried to catch up on Colleen's history. "I watched the last six months of episodes," she said. "My boyfriend used to date a girl who was obsessed with Y&R, so he knew everything about it and brought me up to speed, as well." Sursok earned a Daytime Emmy Award nomination for her portrayal of Colleen the following year. After two years in the role, the Sursok departed causing the writers killed off Colleen. In an interview with Soap Opera Digest in October 2009, Sursok said it was difficult to pursue outside projects and appear on The Young and the Restless as well. Her departure was a mutual decision between Sursok and the showrunners.

In 2009, Sursok starred in the Nickelodeon made-for-television musical film Spectacular!. Sursok portrayed the role Courtney, the lead singer in a high school choir, Spectacular, which is fading in popularity. Courtney convinces a troubled aspiring musician into joining in an attempt to regain their popularity. Sursok recorded over three tracks for the film's soundtrack, which debuted at #44 on the US Billboard Hot 100. The film premiered on February 16, 2009, to over 3.7 million viewers and mixed reviews from critics. Sursok took a break from music, but in 2009 she resumed her role in the Nickelodeon Musical film "Spectacular!. The soundtrack was released on February 3, 2009, and recorded in 2008. Sursok appeared on seven songs from the album, including two solos. The soundtrack peaked at #44 on the Billboard 200.

From July 2010 to January 2011, Sursok had a recurring role on the Disney Channel Original Series, Hannah Montana. She appeared in a total of eight episodes. In 2010, Sursok was cast in ABC Family's planned television adaptation of the Sara Shepard teen mystery book trilogy, Pretty Little Liars. Sursok was cast as Jenna Marshall, a teenage girl who is left blind after a prank gone wrong. The series premiered in June that same year to over 2.47 million viewers. The role is marked as Sursok's most well-known internationally. In June 2013, Sursok announced that she will continue her role as Jenna, even through pregnancy.

In her first adult film role, she played Sarah Corso in the indie film DRIVING BY BRAILLE, directed by Kristina Lloyd and written by Richard H. Moon, released on DVD in May 2013. The story tells of a young woman who relives childhood trauma when she senses her boyfriend is about to propose, and who must sort through the crippling fear and doubt that is holding her back before her past destroys the couple's future. The film also stars Ryan Eggold, Steven Bauer, Finola Hughes, Manu Intiraymi, Andrea Marcovicci, Michael Woods, Mary Alexandra Stiefvater, Madeline Moon, and Indi Bellanova.

In 2014, after several reports of Sursok indicating a return to music, she released a collaboration with singer Joe Brooks, covering "Say Something" as made famous by A Great Big World featuring Christina Aguilera.

Personal life

Tammin Sursok was born to Daryl and Julie Sursok in Johannesburg, South Africa. At the age of 4, she emigrated to Sydney, Australia with her family. On 24 August 2011, Sursok married her boyfriend, actor, producer and director Sean McEwen, in Florence, Italy. Sursok signed an exclusive deal with Australian magazine Woman's Day for the wedding photos In April 2013, Sursok revealed that her movie, Sleeping Around, was filmed in the middle of her wedding. The couple have one child, a daughter, Phoenix Emmanuel (born on 8 October 2013). Sursok also has three dogs, Tiger, Charlie and Sydney. She has a tattoo on her waist saying "Mind Body Soul".

Discography

Albums

Soundtracks

Singles

Filmography

Awards


