
#Article: Ronit Roy
#Type: regular article

Ronit Roy is an Indian film and television actor, known for his portrayal of K D Pathak, Rishabh Bajaj, Mihir Virani, Neil Khanna and Aparajit Deb. He currently acts in the Hindi TV serial Itna Karo Na Mujhe Pyaar as Dr.Nachiket Khanna alias Dr.Neil K. The actor also owns a security business, providing security to Bollywood stars and production houses.

Early life and background

Ronit Roy was born 11 October 1965 in Nagpur to a Bengali Hindu family. He is the eldest son of businessman Brothindranath and Dolly Bose Roy. His younger brother, Rohit Roy is also a TV actor. Ronit spent his childhood in Ahmedabad, Gujarat. This was also the place where he did schooling with the Father of Ayush Sarkar, teenage actor. After his schooling, Roy pursued hotel management.After completion of his studies, he moved to Mumbai and stayed at the residence of filmmaker Subhash Ghai. While Roy was keen to work in film industry, Subhash Ghai persuaded him to not to pursue it due to the difficulties associated with it. Ronit worked as a management trainee at Mumbai's Sea Rock Hotel. To have experience at all different levels, Ronit's work ranged from dish-washing and cleaning, to serving tables and bar-tending. He played the lead role in "Jaan Tere Naam" (1992) which was a commercial success.

Acting career

2010-present

After his success TV, Ronit featured in more Bollywood movies in supporting roles. In 2010 he starred in the critical acclaimed film Udaan, his work was much praised and won him many best supporting actor awards. Udaan brought Ronit back to the movie scene. He next starred in films like Anurag Kashyap's That Girl in Yellow Boots, Karan Johar's Student of the Year, Deepa Mehta's Midnight's Children, Sanjay Gupta's Shootout at Wadala produced by Ekta Kapoor, and Anurag Kashyap's Ugly. More recently, he appeared in Akshay Kumar starrer "BOSS" and Arjun Kapoor starrer 2 States in which his performance received much appreciation.

TV career

Ronit received a call from Balaji Telefilms to offer him a part in the television serial Kammal. Due to lack of any appealing movie offers, he accepted the offer from Balaji Telefilms. Before Kammal got started, Balaji Telefilms also offered Ronit an 8-week cameo in Kasautii Zindagii Kay as Rishabh Bajaj.Rishabh Bajaj was a totally ruthless, yet suave and styling middle aged business tycoon. Ronit acting as Mr.Bajaj was so confident and impressive to the audience, that Balaji Telefilms decided to make Ronit a permanent part of Kasautii Zindagii Kay, which had made him a star in the eyes of the world; because of his well performance as Mr. Bajaj the Balaji Telefilms selected him to play the role of Mihir Virani in the serial kyunki saas bhi kabhi bahu thi. Ronit has done many roles in his Television career, some are fiction and some are non-fiction reality shows which has made him play many kind of chararacters, among which are playing as a fiction role in the serials like Kammal, Kavyanjali, Sarkarr, Kasamh Se, Suraag he played the role of Dharamraj in NDTV Imagine's Bandini (2009-2011). He has also, participated in Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa, a dance reality show in 2007 and another show, Yeh Hai Jalwa in 2008 as a contestant. He even hosted the Kitchen Champions in 2010 which was on Colors TV. He currently stars in SET's courtroom drama Adaalat as KD Pathak, a sharp unique lawyer who only fights for the truth on Sony TV. Currently, he is also stars in Balaji Telefilms's Itna Karo Na Mujhe Pyar as Dr.Nachiket Khanna alias Neil K on Sony TV.

Business venture

Ronit owns Ace Security and Protection agency. It currently caters to Bollywood actors like Salman Khan, Amitabh Bacchan, Mithun Chakraborty, Shahrukh Khan and Aamir Khan, also to Indian Premier League ex-Chairman and ex-Commissioner Lalit Modi and his son Ruchir Modi. Some of the movie projects that Ace Security and Protection have also lent their services to are Lagaan, Dil Chahta Hai, Yaadein, Na Tum Jano Na Hum, Saathiya, and Armaan.

Personal life

On 25 December 2003, Ronit was married to actress and model Neelam Singh. Ronit is the father of three - two daughters and one son. His eldest daughter Ona (from his previous marriage) was born in 1991, and is currently residing in the US. In May 2005, his and Neelam's first child, daughter Aador was born. In October 2007, their son, Agasthya Bose Roy was born.

Filmography

Television

Fiction shows

Non-Fiction/Reality shows

Awards

Roy won the Best Actor in a Negative Role Awards at Star Screen Awards and Zee Cine Awards for his role of an oppressive father in the movie Udaan (2010). He also won the Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actor and The Global Indian Film and Television Honours for Best Actor in Negative Role for his role in Udaan.

Controversy

On 27 October 2011, Ronit Roy was arrested by Mumbai police for rash and negligent driving, after he was involved in a road accident in the Amboli suburb of Mumbai. He was returning from a Diwali party when his high speeding Mercedes car hit a Wagon-R injuring people, one of whom was seriously hurt.However, he got bail after a few hours and was released.


