
#Article: Lauren Sánchez
#Type: regular article

Lauren Wendy Sánchez (born December 19, 1969) is an American news anchor, entertainment reporter, and media personality. She is the co-host on KTTV Fox-11's Good Day LA and the station's Ten o'clock News. She was formerly the weekend anchor and special correspondent on Extra. Sánchez is also a regular contributor on shows including Larry King Live, The Joy Behar Show, Showbiz Tonight and The View.

Career

Sánchez began her career as a desk assistant at KCOP-TV in Los Angeles. She also held positions as an anchor and reporter at KTVK-TV in Phoenix before joining the syndicated entertainment show Extra as a reporter. From there, Sánchez moved to Fox Sports Net where she served as anchor as well as a correspondent for the sports magazine Going Deep and entertainment reporter for FSN's Best Damn Sports Show Period.

In 1999, Sánchez was one of two finalists to co-host ABC'sThe View with Barbara Walters. The positions was ultimately given to Lisa Ling. Sánchez subsequently re-joined KCOP-TV. Sánchez was the original host of So You Think You Can Dance. Sánchez left the show after one season to have her second child.

In 2009, Sánchez returned to Extra as weekend anchor and special correspondent. Sánchez currently works as a correspondent and stand by anchor on Good Day LA, a morning show on KTTV-TV, a Fox affiliate in Los Angeles.

Film appearances

Sánchez has appeared in many films, including The Longest Yard, Fantastic Four, The Day After Tomorrow, Akeelah and the Bee, Killer Movie, Batman Begins, and Fight Club. Sánchez starred in the viral video campaign for The Dark Knight as Lydia Filanjeri, a reporter for Gotham Cable News. She has also appeared on the CBS series NCIS and the NBC soap opera Days of Our Lives.

Personal life

Sánchez is married to talent agent Patrick Whitesell. Sánchez has two sons and one daughter: Nikko, born 2001, from a previous relationship with former NFL tight end Tony Gonzalez; Evan, born 2006; and Ella, born in 2008.


