
#Article: Kristin dos Santos
#Type: regular article

Kristin dos Santos (née Veitch; born February 24, 1975) is an American journalist and columnist for the E! cable channel, specializing in coverage of current-day television series airing on the major American broadcast, cable and premium networks, along with streaming sources.

Biography

Early life and career

dos Santos was born in St. Louis, Missouri. Her family moved to San Diego, California the same year she was born. She graduated from Poway High School in Poway, California, then continued on to Loyola Marymount University in Los Angeles where she earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in communications. After college she went to work for Southern California newspapers as a reporter and an editor before moving on to E!.

Santos has a blog on E!’s website where she talks about TV shows with the help of her reporters and interns. She used live interactive chat with fans where she took questions about their favorite shows, sometimes involving spoilers and "shipping" news for upcoming episodes. The chat transcripts were posted on the website. She also posted a weekly column on Fridays which was an often lengthy article about shows, sometimes containing interviews. Originally, she used the name "Wanda" as a nom de plume when she worked solely for E!Online on the web side for privacy reasons regarding the spoilers she reported, though she switched to using her real name once she began also working for the television side of E! News. She regularly appears on the E! News, mainly on the midweek and weekend editions.

dos Santo's section of the E!Online site, "Watch with Kristin", has evolved with the web and E!Online; originally just a text-only column, currently the site is a mix of the traditional "Q&A" weekly column, dos Santos's social media and television work, along with other segments such as awards like the "Tater Tops" and "Save it or Sink it" for first-season programming.

In addition to her work on E!, dos Santos has acted in small television roles as expressions of her enthusiasm for television. She has appeared in the television programs Summerland, Heroes, Tru Calling and Felicity. She played a dead body for one episode of Six Feet Under. dos Santos played "The 30s Woman", a dead body that comes back to life in the third episode of Pushing Daisies.

Personal life

On July 14, 2007, she married João dos Santos, taking his surname as hers both personally and professionally two months later. The dos Santos family has two children, Luca Alexander (April 5, 2009), and Matteo Tomaz (February 20, 2011).

Filmography


