
#Article: Joan Burton
#Type: regular article

Joan Burton (born 1 February 1949) is an Irish Labour Party politician. In the Government of Ireland, she has served as Tánaiste (deputy prime minister) since 2014 and as Minister for Social Protection since 2011. She is the Leader of the Labour Party since July 2014. She is also a Teachta Dála (TD) for the Dublin West constituency.

Burton was first elected to Dáil Éireann at the 1992 general election. From 1995 to 1997, she was Minister of State at the Department of Foreign Affairs. She lost her seat at the 1997 general election but was re-elected to Dáil Éireann at the 2002 general election.

Early and private life

Burton is a native of the Stoneybatter area of Dublin. She was adopted by the Burtons as a baby and brought up in Inchicore. Her adoptive father worked in the local iron foundry. She was educated at St. Gabriel's NS, Cowper Street and St. Joseph Sisters of Charity Secondary School, Stanhope Street and University College Dublin (UCD), where she graduated with a degree in commerce. She is also a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants. She has worked as a lecturer in Accountancy in the Dublin Institute of Technology and the University of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

Political career

She first stood for election at the 1989 general election, when she stood as one of two Labour candidates in the Dublin Central constituency, failing to get elected. At the local elections in 1991, she was elected to Dublin County Council for the Mulhuddart electoral area. Burton was first elected to Dáil Éireann at the 1992 general election, representing Dublin West in the 27th Dáil. She was appointed Minister of State at the Department of Social Welfare in the Fianna Fáil-Labour Party coalition that was formed after that election. With the breakdown of that coalition and establishment of a Rainbow Coalition between the Labour Party, Fine Gael and Democratic Left in early 1995, she became Minister of State at the Department of Foreign Affairs, a position she held until the coalition's defeat at 1997 general election.

She lost her seat at the 1997 general election to Joe Higgins of the Socialist Party. Joan was re-elected to Fingal County Council in the 1999 local elections, on this occasion winning a seat in the Castleknock electoral area. She was re-elected to the Dáil for Dublin West at the 2002 general election. She was then appointed the Spokesperson on Finance. She was a candidate for the deputy leadership of the party in 2002, obtaining 24% of the first preference vote, but was unsuccessful. She became deputy leader of the Labour Party in September 2007.

She was voted by political journalists as the Magill TD of the Year 2007 and 2008..

Burton was re-elected to represent Dublin West at the 2011 general election, topping the poll on the 1st count with 9,627 votes, and was the first TD to be elected in the country for the 31st Dáil.

Labour Party leader

Labour polled badly at the 2014 local and European elections, leading to the resignation of Eamon Gilmore as leader. Burton announced her candidacy for the leadership to replace him. On 4 July 2014, she won the leadership election, defeating Alex White by 78% to 22%. The Taoiseach, Enda Kenny, appointed her as Tánaiste on the same day. On her election she said that the Labour Party "would focus on social repair, and govern more with the heart". She is the first woman to lead the Labour Party.

On 11 July Burton announced the Labour Party cabinet ministers with party deputy leader Alan Kelly TD appointed as Minister for the Environment, Alex White TD as Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources, Jan O'Sullivan TD as Minister for Education & Skills and Gerald Nash TD as Minister of State at Cabinet for Business and Employment. Brendan Howlin TD remained Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform. Burton also remained in her current ministry at the Department of Social Protection.


