
#Article: Chrystia Freeland
#Type: regular article

Chrystia Freeland   (born February 8, 1968) is a Canadian writer, journalist, and politician. Freeland has served in various editorial positions with the Financial Times, The Globe and Mail and Thomson Reuters, where she was the managing director and editor for consumer news before she announced her resignation to run for the Liberal Party nomination in the by-election to replace Bob Rae as the Member of Parliament for Toronto Centre. She won the Liberal nomination on September 15, 2013, and was elected to parliament in the November 25, 2013, by-election defeating Linda McQuaig of the New Democratic Party, and acted as the Liberal Party of Canada's trade critic. With the federal electoral redistribution for the 2015 federal election Freeland chose to seek election in newly created University—Rosedale electoral district rather than seek re-election in the adjusted Toronto Centre electoral district. She was elected to this seat, October 19, 2015. She was appointed to the Cabinet of Canada as Minister for International Trade on November 4th, 2015.

Early life

Freeland was born in Peace River, Alberta. Her father, Donald Freeland, was a farmer and lawyer and a member of the Liberal Party of Canada, and her mother, Halyna (Chomiak) Freeland (1946-2007), was also a lawyer who once ran for election in Edmonton-Strathcona, representing the New Democratic Party. Her paternal grandfather Wilbur Freeland was also a farmer and lawyer who rode in the Calgary Stampede and whose sister Beulah was the wife of federal MP Ged Baldwin and her paternal grandmother Helen (Caulfield) Freeland was a WWII war bride from Glasgow, while her mother was born in a displaced persons camp in Bad Wörishofen, Germany, to Ukrainian Catholic parents, Mykhailo Chomiak and Alexandra , Alexandra (Loban) Chomiak. Freeland attended the United World College of the Adriatic. She received her Bachelor of Arts degree in Russian history and literature from Harvard University and a Master of Studies degree in Slavonic Studies from St Antony's at the University of Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar in 1993.

Journalism career

Freeland started her journalism career as a stringer for the Financial Times, The Washington Post and The Economist while working in Ukraine. Freeland later worked for the Financial Times in London as a deputy editor, and then as an editor for its weekend edition, FT.com, and UK news. Freeland also served as Moscow bureau chief and Eastern Europe correspondent for the Financial Times.

Freeland served as the deputy editor of The Globe and Mail from 1999 to 2001.

Freeland was the managing director and editor of consumer news at Thomson Reuters. She was also a weekly columnist for the Globe and Mail. Previously she was editor of Thomson Reuters Digital, a position she held since April 2011. Prior to that she was the global editor-at-large of Reuters news since March 1, 2010, having formerly been the United States managing editor at the Financial Times, based in New York City.

Published works

She is the author of Sale of the Century, a 2000 book about Russia's journey from communism to capitalism and Plutocrats: The Rise of the New Global Super-Rich and the Fall of Everyone Else in 2012.

Plutocrats was a New York Times bestseller, and the winner of the 2013 Lionel Gelber Prize for non-fiction reporting on foreign affairs. It also won the 2013 National Business Book Award for the most outstanding Canadian business-related book.

Personal life

Freeland is married to Graham Bowley, a British writer and New York Times reporter. They have three children together. She has lived in Toronto since the summer of 2013 when she returned from abroad to run for election.She speaks Ukrainian at home with her children, English, and is conversant in French.  She also speaks Russian, and Italian, and is the co-owner, with her sister of an apartment which overlooks the Maidan square in Kyiv.

Political career

On July 26, 2013 she left journalism to enter Canadian politics as a candidate for the nomination of the Liberal Party in the riding of Toronto Centre. On September 15, 2013 she won the nomination, with an opportunity to replace outgoing MP Bob Rae in the November 25, 2013 by-election. Freeland won 49% of the vote and was elected.

As the Liberal Party of Canada's trade critic, Freeland interviewed noted economist Larry Summers in a formal event at the 2014 Liberal Party convention; the interview is available on YouTube and the party website. Freeland wrote an op-ed in The New York Times, in which she contraposed the rise of the plutocrats with the popularity of the television series Downton Abbey.

On 27 January 2014, Freeland wrote an op-ed for The Globe and Mail, in which she excoriated the government of Viktor Yanukovich, who later was ousted as during the 2014 Ukrainian revolution.  She is a proponent of personal asset seizures and travel bans as part of programmes of economic sanctions.  Later, at the beginning of March, Freeland visited Ukraine on behalf of the Liberal Party, and tweeted her progress in meeting community leaders and members of the government in Kyiv. She lunched with the chief rabbi of Kyiv, met with Mustafa Dzhemilev, leader of the Crimean Tatars and an MP, and with Vitaly Klitchko, who is leader of the Ukrainian Democratic Alliance for Reform party, and with Ukrainian MP Petro Poroshenko, who was subsequently elected President of Ukraine in May 2014, Ukrainian presidential elections.

Freeland was one of thirteen Canadians banned from travelling to Russia under retaliatory sanctions imposed by Russian President Vladimir Putin in March 2014. She replied through her official Twitter feed, "Love Russ lang/culture, loved my yrs in Moscow; but it's an honour to be on Putin's sanction list, esp in company of friends Cotler & Grod."

In the redistricting in 2012 and 2013, much of Freeland's base was shifted from Toronto Centre to the new riding of University-Rosedale, while seemingly making Toronto Centre less safe for her. Freeland opted to run in University-Rosedale, and defeated NDP challenger Jennifer Hollett.

On November 4, 2015, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau chose Freeland as Minister of International Trade.

Media appearances

Freeland appeared several times as a panelist on Real Time with Bill Maher between 2010 and 2015. She has also appeared on The McLaughlin Group, The Dylan Ratigan Show, Imus in the Morning, Fareed Zakaria GPS, and The Colbert Report. She is a frequent guest on public radio's political debate program Left, Right & Center, produced by KCRW. In addition, Freeland was featured on a panel discussion on Tom Ashbrook's On Point regarding inequality and democracy in the United States.  In June 2013 she gave a speech at the TED Talks, speaking on the subjects of economic inequality, plutocracy, globalization, and "the growing gap between the working poor and the increasingly disconnected mega-rich."


