
#Article: Demián Bichir
#Type: regular article

Demián Bichir Nájera (; born August 1, 1963) is a Mexican actor, from a well-known family of Mexican actors, the Bichir family, which include his parents Alejandro Bichir and Maricruz Nájera and his brothers Odiseo Bichir and Bruno Bichir. He began his acting career starring in many Mexican telenovelas and films before achieving fame for his roles in Mexican films such as the record-breaking Sexo, pudor y lágrimas and Sin noticias de Dios. In the U.S., he is best known for his role as Detective Marco Ruiz in the FX drama television series The Bridge.  He has also been nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor for A Better Life (2011).

Early life

Bichir was born at Mexico City, Mexico, the son of actors Alejandro Bichir (Alejandro Bichir Batres) and Maricruz Nájera (María de la Cruz Nájera Botello). He began his acting career at the age of 14 in the telenovela Rina with Ofelia Medina. His second acting role was as an adult in Vivir enamorada - both telenovelas were during his years with Televisa. The following year he obtained a role in his first movie, the American production Choices of the Heart. He got his first starring character in the Telenovela El Rincon de los Prodigios where he acts as a stranger who performs miracles in front of the people confronting the corrupt authorities and the church.

Career

Bichir continued his acting roles in telenovelas with film productions of Mexico, Spain and the United States. After a long retirement of the Mexican telenovelas in favor of a movie career, he went back to TV Azteca in the telenovela Nada Personal where he played the role of an honest detective trying to tackle corruption and drug problems in Mexico. His performance led him to act as the same detective in Con Toda El Alma.

Mexican movie breakout

His movie Sexo, pudor y lágrimas (1999) broke box-office records in Mexico becoming the #1 movie in the history of Mexican cinema. He performed one of the main characters and brought him sufficient praise to earn him the Ariel. This movie brought a lot of attention to him and to his brothers. They acted in so many movies that in the MTV Movie Awards-México a special category was created: "Mejor Bichir en una Película" ("Best Bichir in a movie"). He earned this award for the 2003 film Bendito infierno (Holy Hell or Don't Tempt Me), in which he co-starred with Victoria Abril, Penélope Cruz, and Gael García Bernal.

United States

His American debut occurred in the film In the Time of the Butterflies (2001) starring Salma Hayek, based on the real life of a group of sisters that fought against the government of a Dominican dictator. Later he got some recognition when he depicted Fidel Castro in Steven Soderbergh's biopic Che (2008) on the life of Argentine revolutionary Che Guevara.

He was exposed to a wider American audience with his recurring role as Esteban Reyes, the corrupt mayor of Tijuana and love interest of Nancy Botwin from Season 4 to Season 7 of the Showtime series Weeds.

Bichir found mainstream U.S. work following his critically acclaimed performance as Carlos Galindo in the 2011 drama A Better Life, which garnered him nominations for the Independent Spirit Award and Screen Actors Guild Award. On 24 January 2012, he was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role for his performance in A Better Life. His nomination came as a shock to Mexican and American audiences alike. He is the first male Mexican actor to receive this nomination since Anthony Quinn. Though Bichir failed to win the award, he followed it up with roles in the major American releases Savages, The Heat, and Machete Kills. In 2013, he began starring in the FX drama television series The Bridge as Detective Marco Ruiz.

Bichir recently completed his directorial debut, a movie called Refugio.

Political activism

Bichir is an ACLU Ambassador for Immigration Rights.

Personal life

When Bichir was 22, he moved to New York City with his ex-girlfriend in order to get into the Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute. Then for a brief period he decided not to act and started working at the Rosa Mexicano Restaurant in NYC while learning English. Later, he moved to Los Angeles but had no success landing any acting roles, ultimately deciding to go back to his native Mexico where he found great success.

Bichir was married once, to Mexican singer, Lisset Gutiérrez, whom he divorced in 2003. He has since stated that he finds long-term commitment difficult. He had a short-lived relationship which led to the birth of his daughter, Gala, in May 2011 in Spain. He remains involved in the child's life.

Demian holds dual Mexican and American citizenship. Demian resides in Los Angeles and Mexico City.

Filmography

Television

Film

Dubbing roles

	 The Little Mermaid - Chef Louis, Eric

	 Jetsons the Movie - Apollo Blue

	 Aladdin (1992 Disney film) - Aladdin

	 The Return of Jafar - Aladdin

	 Aladdin and the King of Thieves - Aladdin

	 The Road to El Dorado - Tulio

Accolades


