
#Article: Megan Dodds
#Type: regular article

Megan Lynne Dodds (born February 15, 1970) is an American actress.

Early life

Dodds was born in Sacramento, California. After high school, she enrolled in a community college where she was cast as Bananas in John Guare's The House of Blue Leaves. The role inspired her to apply to the Juilliard School, where she studied for four years as a member of the Drama Division's Group 24 (1991-1995).

Career

After graduation, Dodds spent two years in Broadway and Off Broadway productions, before being spotted by British comedian Ben Elton, and came to London in 1997 to play a bunny girl in Elton's play Popcorn. As a result of meeting her photographer husband Oliver Pearce, she became a resident in London: "I love it here, I really feel like I learn a lot. There’s a lot of variety in terms of work." She has appeared in television shows such as Love in a Cold Climate, the BBC One series Spooks, and Viva Blackpool. Her stage roles have included As You Like It in 1999 and Up for Grabs in 2006.

Dodds won the London Theatregoers' Choice Award for Best Actress in the one woman show My Name is Rachel Corrie. The show opened at the Royal Court Theatre in London, but a planned transfer to the New York Theatre Workshop was cancelled, with rumors of the theater being afraid of the show's Gaza Strip-based political content. Dodds fought against the imposed indefinite delay, and the debate of censorship on such a sensitive issue at the time of the post-Iraq war debate became publicised by the New York Times. After a successful run in London's West End, the show eventually played to a sellout audience at the off-Broadway Minetta Lane Theatre in early 2006.

In 2006, Dodds joined the cast of the British sitcom Not Going Out as Kate, but she left the show after the first series. Her best known film role is perhaps the spoiled and selfish stepsister Marguerite in the 1998 romance film Ever After.

Personal life

After going to England in 1997, Dodds met fashion and advertising photographer Oliver Pearce. They later married and moved to Battersea. They have one daughter, Isabella.

Filmography

Film

Television

Stage

Video games


