
#Article: Kate Magowan
#Type: regular article

Katie Victoria "Kate" Magowan (born 1 June 1975) is an English actress. She is married to actor John Simm. She has been in film, theatre, television and radio productions. Her best known role is Princess Una in the feature film Stardust.

Early life

After finishing high school, and having trained as a dancer, she graduated from the Actors' Institute, London and has trained in the Meisner technique.

Acting career

She began her screen career in season 2 of Dream Team. Sky 1's first original drama series. She went on to appear in many films and television roles. To name a few, Una in the magical film Stardust in 2007, Kidulthood, 4.3.2.1, Screwed, A Lonely Place to Die, It's All Gone Pete Tong.

Stage

She made her stage debut in a production of Caryl Churchill's Top Girls and has gone on to work consistently in film, theatre, television and radio.

Television

Magowan is due to appear in Spotless on Esquire tv in the U.S, playing Sonny Clay. She has also featured in two episodes of the third series of Primeval as Eve. She also stars as "Martha Bannerman" in four episodes of A Dinner of Herbs by Catherine Cookson, a TV series made for British television. She most recently appeared in series 15 of Silent Witness in the two-part story 'Domestic' as murder victim Justine Thompson.

From 2013 to 2014, she played Sadie Young in EastEnders.

Film

Her film credits include leading roles in Michael Winterbottom's 24 Hour Party People, Sonya in It's All Gone Pete Tong, Princess Una in the Stardust, Jenny in "A Lonely Place to Die", Danielle in "Screwed" and Mrs Gammon in "Elfie Hopkins", Natalie in "Outside Bet".

Personal life

She married the English actor John Simm in April 2004 in the Forest of Dean and they have two children.

Magowan and Simm have appeared together in three films: 24 Hour Party People, the award winning short film Devilwood and the heist thriller Tuesday, as well as in the BBC Series Exile.

Filmography


