
#Article: Gauri Khan
#Type: regular article

Gauri Khan (born Gauri Chibber on October 8, 1970), is an Indian film producer and interior designer. She is the co-founder of the film production and distribution company Red Chillies Entertainment with her husband, Bollywood actor Shah Rukh Khan.

She has produced many major films including Main Hoon Na, Om Shanti Om, My Name Is Khan, Ra.One, Chennai Express, Happy New Year,  Dilwale and Raees.

Personal life

Gauri Chhibber Khan was born in Delhi to Punjabi parents; Savita Chhibber and Colonel Ramesh Chandra Chhibber. Growing up in the Panchsheel Park suburb, she did her schooling at Loreto Convent School and graduated from Lady Sriram college, New Delhi. She holds a bachelor's degree in History.

She met Shah Rukh Khan in 1984, and married him on 25 October 1991 prior to his successful Bollywood career. Gauri and Khan have 3 kids together; son Aryan Khan (b.November 12, 1997), AbRam Khan (b.May 27, 2013) via surrogacy and daughter; Suhana Khan (b.May 22, 2000).

Career

In 2004, together with Shah Rukh Khan and distribution company Red Chillies Entertainment where she serves as the main producer, she became producer of Farah Khan's directorial debut Main Hoon Na, which launched her career as a producer in Bollywood. The film did well at the box office, becoming the second highest grossing film of the year. Since then she has produced seven films for the company including some of the projects in which her husband is the lead actor. She also made a guest appearance in Om Shanti Om (2007) and Happy New Year (2014).

She used to host a weekly Hindi music countdown show, Oye, for MTV India in the 1990s. She is also the face of the fashion line, Aftershock. Khan first expressed interest in interior design as a hobby while doing up her Bandra bungalow, Mannat. However, in 2010, she professionally ventured into interior designing in partnership with Hrithik Roshan's ex-wife Sussanne Khan to design exclusive interior projects together. The same year, they collaborated on their first commercial project together in Vadodara of a massive 60 thousand sq ft private home.

In 2012, Khan launched her own line of furniture in partnership with Roshan's home store in Mumbai - The Charcoal Project. In an interview with Vogue magazine she stated that she choose interior design because of her interest in art, she explained: “I started off as an artist in school with various sketches. I continued that as a hobby for many years, and I think that is where my designs come from.

In 2014, it was announced that Gauri Khan is set to launch her brand new interior store in Mumbai named Design Cell. She has so far received positive responses towards her creativity.

In the media

Gauri Khan is known for keeping low profile and being media shy, though she is often cited as one of the most stylish women in Bollywood. She appeared on the cover of Vogue in January 2008. The magazine called her the "First Lady of Bollywood". Priya Tanna, the editor of Vogue India wrote : "That she is stylish, enigmatic, and poised is known, but at the shoot we saw another side of her. Even in the frames she shares with Shah Rukh, she holds her own impressively." She also walked the ramp alongside her husband for filmmaker turned fashion designer Karan Johar at the HDIL India Couture Week 2009.

In 2008, she appeared in a television and print commercial for the home furnishings brand, D'decor along with her husband. The couple play themselves in the commercial. On 11 January 2009, while shooting in Los Angeles for My Name Is Khan, she accompanied her husband and director Karan Johar to attend the 66th Golden Globe Awards. In October 2013, she earned much publicity when she accompanied Shah Rukh to attend the wedding of British-Asian socialite Pamela Grover's son in the city of Cannes.

Filmography

Filmography as a producer


