
#Article: Hüsamettin Cindoruk
#Type: regular article

Hüsamettin Cindoruk (1933) is a Turkish politician and the 17th Speaker of the Parliament of Turkey between 1991-1995.He was also the acting president of Turkey in 1993 He has also been the leader of two political parties, notably of the True Path Party.

Biography

He was born in 1933 in İzmir to Turkish Cretan parents. He did all his studies in Ankara, graduated from the prestigious TED Ankara College and attended the University of Ankara, earning a degree in 1955 from the Law School. Following his graduation, he started exercising the lawyer's profession.

He rose to national attention at a relatively young age when, after the 1960 Turkish coup d'état, he became part of the defence team for the imprisoned, and later executed ex-Prime Minister Adnan Menderes and other Democratic Party notables. Despite the final verdict in the case, the one-year-long desperate efforts by the defence team gained widespread respect across Turkey. After the restoration of the civilian rule, he joined the Justice Party and two military coups later, after the 1980 military coup in Turkey, he became in 1985 the Secretary General of the True Path Party, a continuation of the Justice Party in the forced absence from politics of its leader Süleyman Demirel. 

He handed over the party leadership to Demirel after his return to politics and with the Democratic Party's election victory in 1991, became the 17th Speaker of the Parliament between 1991-1995. After Süleyman Demirel's election to the Presidency of the Republic vacated by Turgut Özal's death in 1993, he could have become the Prime Minister if he had not opted for a time to remain in his seat, thus opening the way for Tansu Çiller. When he eventually pushed his candicacy forward, Tansu Çiller had gained sufficient momentum within the party. He resigned from the Speaker's position in early 1995 and launched his own political movement around Party for a Democratic Turkey (DTP) But the party did not register successful results in the general elections of 1996. Nevertheless, Cindoruk and his party took part in the government formed by Mesut Yılmaz during that electoral term and after bad results also in the elections of 1999, he quit the chairmanship of the party and left active politics. After years at 2009 he became the leader of Democrat Party and after several months he united Democratic Party and Motherland Party.

Hüsamettin Cindoruk is married and has three children.


