
#Article: Adrienne Maloof
#Type: regular article

Adrienne Maloof (born September 4, 1961) is an American businesswoman, television personality, shoe designer and co-owner of the various business holdings of Maloof Companies, which include a 2% stake in the Palms Casino Resort in Las Vegas, Nevada; Maloof Productions, Maloof Music and the annual Maloof Money Cup skateboarding event.

Early life

Adrienne Maloof is of Lebanese and Irish heritage. A member of the Maloof family, she is the third child and only daughter of billionaire entrepreneur George J. Maloof, Sr., whose wife Colleen co-owns the holdings of the Maloof Companies with Adrienne and her brothers, George J. Maloof, Jr., Joe Maloof, Gavin Maloof, and Phil Maloof. She was born on September 4, 1961 in Albuquerque, New Mexico, where her father owned a Coors beer distributorship. She attended the University of New Mexico on a full scholarship as a tennis player, where she earned a degree in Political Science.

Career

After working in the marketing and promotions department of the Maloof family's liquor and wine business, her role grew to encompass the interests of all Maloof Companies and she has continued to control much of the Maloof Companies' marketing operations for more than twenty years. She is also involved in setting customer service standards for all Maloof Companies, including brother George Jr.'s Palms Casino Resort in Las Vegas, and she has produced many of Maloof Productions' projects, including the 2005 horror film Feast.

She was a cast member for the first three seasons of Bravo's The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills, part of the network's Real Housewives series, alongside Kim and Kyle Richards, Camille Grammer, Lisa Vanderpump, Brandi Glanville, and Taylor Armstrong. On March 4, 2013, Maloof announced she would be leaving the TV series.

In December 2011, she released Adrienne Maloof by Charles Jourdan, a small shoe collection produced by Charles Jourdan.

Personal life

On May 2, 2002, she married plastic surgeon Paul Nassif, who specializes in facial plastic surgery—specifically rhinoplasty. He appeared on E!'s Dr. 90210 and currently stars in "Botched" also on E!. The couple has three sons: Gavin (b. 2003) and twins Colin and Christian (b. 2006). They resided in Beverly Hills, California. Nassif filed for separation from her on July 30, 2012. The papers, filed in Los Angeles Superior Court, cited irreconcilable differences as the reason for the separation. On November 8, 2012 their divorce was settled.  On January 22, 2013, Maloof confirmed that she was formally dating Sean Stewart -- son of British rocker Rod Stewart.


