
#Article: Albert Black
#Type: regular article

Albert C. Black, Jr. (born July 24, 1959) is an American business entrepreneur and community trailblazer. Black served as the first African American Chairman of the Dallas Regional Chamber in Dallas, Texas from 2000 to 2002. He traveled to 16 countries on joint trade missions with former Mayor Ron Kirk promoting good will and business relationships. During his term as Chairman, Black continued to manage the day-to-day operations of his regional logistics firm, On-Target Supplies & Logistics.

Black is featured in Zig Ziglar's God's Way Is Still the Best Way and Michael Hamel's Executive Influence: Impacting Your Workplace for Christ. Additionally, Black was included in Black Enterprise magazine's Top 100 Minority Companies for 2005, 2006, and 2007. He has received three Texas Instruments Supplier Excellence Awards and is a recipient of the 30th Congressional District Award for outstanding achievement in the field of business.

As the advisor and board member of many corporations and organizations in Dallas, Albert Black is an influential figure in the city of Dallas and to Dallas County politics.

Early life

Black was born in 1959, the youngest of seven children and raised in the Frazier Courts housing projects in South Dallas. As a doorman at a hotel in downtown Dallas, his father, Albert Black Sr., came to know influential city business leaders who would regularly meet with the Chamber of Commerce. After work, Black Sr. would return home and explain to his son how these men would determine which individuals would hold powerful positions within the city. He would tell Black Jr., “I want my boy to be like those men running the city.” Hearing these words were Black's initial inspiration to become an entrepreneur, nonprofit volunteer, and civic leader.

Black began his business career at age ten, when he and his friends borrowed a lawn mower and started Best Friends Lawn Service, charging $2 per lawn, and eventually becoming "the first in the neighborhood to get a power mower."

During this time, President Lyndon Johnson's War on Poverty began. Government service trucks made stops to the projects Black resided in to deliver free lunches to the low-income area. Black, however, refused to participate in this program. He later was quoted as saying, "I distinctly remember how much disdain I had for the free-lunch program, I would have my own lunch instead. Welfare has a place, but it’s a poor substitute for gainful employment. One is loaded with ambition, and the other is not."

He attended high school in the Dallas Independent School District and after graduation, he continued his studies at the University of Texas at Dallas, graduating with a Bachelor's Degree of General Studies with a focus on business and political science. Following the completion of his studies at UTD, he enrolled at Southern Methodist University where he received an M.B.A. from the Cox School of Business.

On-Target Supplies & Logistics

Black co-founded On-Target Supplies & Logistics in 1982 as janitorial supplies distribution company. When the business was slow to take off, Albert got a night job in the information systems department at Texas Utilities in order to fund his company. For ten years he worked his own business from 7:30 AM to 4:30 PM, then went to his job from 5:00 PM - 2:00 AM. He guided the company from a two-person start-up to a growing operation with 190 employees that has expanded to offer outsourced logistic solutions, supply chain management, and value-added reselling. On-Target’s central offices are located in southern Dallas with additional logistics operations throughout Dallas / Fort Worth, Sherman, Texas, Houston, Texas, and Tucson, AZ.

ReadyToWork

In 2006, Black launched ReadyToWork, On-Target's professional development service. ReadyToWork offers staffing, career training, work readiness, available training space and training resources to its clients.

OTSL Charities

In 2006, Black established On-Target's social service arm, OTSL Charities, which donates time and resources to local area communities. OTSL Charities participates with other local charities to give back to the community, including helping Habitat for Humanity build houses, raising money for the March of Dimes and volunteering with at-risk students at the Texans Can! Academy.

Volunteerism and civic duty

In addition to being an entrepreneur, Black is also active in public service, civic duty and social volunteerism.

He has served as a Trustee and became Chairman of the Baylor Health Care System of Dallas in 2010, an Advisory Board of Southern Methodist University Cox School of Business, and a Regent for Baylor University-Waco.

Black has previously served on various boards including: Dallas Black Chamber of Commerce, Chase Bank of Texas, Hankamer School of Business at Baylor University, and Paul Quinn College. In 1997, former Governor George W. Bush appointed Black to serve on the Board of Regents of Texas Southern University in Houston. In 2000, Black served as the first African-American Chairman of the Greater Dallas Chamber of Commerce's Board of Directors.

Black serves as the Treasurer for Texas State Senator Royce West, Judge John Creuzot, and Mayor Tom Leppert of Dallas.

Black is a member of Omega Psi Phi, a national public service fraternity.

He is a member of New Hope Baptist Church. His wife Gwyneith is the Executive Director of OTSL Charities. His children Oliver Victor Black, Albert C. Black, III (Tre’) and Cora René Black are discerning advisors and his most precious assets. The family enjoys traveling, hiking, and spending secluded time together on Lake Cypress Springs.


