
#Article: Alexandre Trudeau
#Type: regular article

Alexandre Emmanuel "Sacha" Trudeau (born December 25, 1973) is a Canadian filmmaker and journalist. He is the second son of Canada's former Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau, and Margaret Trudeau, and the younger brother of Canada's current Prime Minister Justin Trudeau.

Early life and education

His family was attending midnight mass at Mount Carmel Roman Catholic Church when his mother went into labor and rushed to Ottawa Civic Hospital. 

The second of three children born to Pierre and Margaret Trudeau during Pierre's term in office, Alexandre Trudeau was a media sensation, just like his brothers, at the time of his birth. However, Pierre and Margaret tried as much as possible to protect their children from the public eye, and after Pierre retired as Prime Minister in 1984, he raised them in relative privacy in Montreal. 

Like his father and brothers, Alexandre studied at Collège Jean-de-Brébeuf. He graduated with a philosophy degree from McGill University in 1997. At birth, he was given the nickname "Sacha" (the Russian diminutive of Alexander) in recognition of his father's love of Russian literature and culture. The name also is linked to former ambassador of the USSR to Canada and family friend Alexander Yakovlev.

When talking about her sons each having distinctly different personalities in an interview in 1977, Margaret Trudeau said, "Justin, 6, is a prince  -  a very good little boy. Sasha, born Christmas Day, 1973, is a bit of a revolutionary, very determined and strong willed. Miche (Michel) is a happy, well-adjusted child, who combined the best traits of both brothers."

While attending McGill, Alexandre joined the Canadian Forces as a Reserve Entry Scheme Officer with Royal Canadian Hussars reserve regiment in 1996. He trained at CFB Gagetown, New Brunswick and was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant, but released voluntarily before completing his training as an armoured officer. Following graduation, he traveled to West Africa to produce his first documentary: Liberia, the Secret War (1998).

When their father died in 2000, both Alexandre and Justin returned to the public eye. Although Alexandre was visibly more reserved and quieter than his brother, his heightened public profile brought new attention to his work as a journalist. After Pierre Trudeau's death Alexandre moved into his home. His sister-in-law Sophie explained that he had a stronger emotional attachment to the home.

Documentary work

In the years following his father's death, Trudeau produced documentaries for Canadian television. In 2003, he was one of the highest-profile Canadian journalists covering the 2003 invasion of Iraq, producing a documentary film for the CTV program W5, Embedded In Baghdad. In June 2005, Trudeau focused attention on what he said were the implications for civil liberties in the Canadian government's use of security certificates to detain indefinitely, without trial, suspected terrorists based on secret evidence. Trudeau attracted controversy in August 2006 for an article he penned praising Fidel Castro's Cuba.

Trudeau offered to be a surety for Hassan Almrei, a Syrian refugee held in a Canadian jail for four years without any charges being laid. His appearance in court in support of Almrei resulted in front page coverage in the Toronto Star and National Post and major media attention being given to the security certificate issue for the first time. Trudeau's efforts were chronicled in his documentary "Secure Freedom." Almrei was ordered released under house arrest by a Federal Court judge on January 2, 2009. On December 14, 2009, Almrei was released. Trudeau's most recent documentary "Refuge", produced in 2008, tells the story of the crisis in Darfur.

Public life

Currently, Trudeau is President and Chief Producer at Jujufilms. He and wife Zoë Bedos became the parents of a son and two daughters. He is a director of the Pierre Elliott Trudeau Foundation for excellence in social sciences and humanities research and innovation.


