
#Article: Alison Hammond
#Type: regular article

Alison Hammond (born 5 February 1975) is an English television personality who became notable after appearing on the third series of Big Brother in 2002 and was the second housemate to be evicted from the Big Brother house.

Hammond has since become a presenter on ITV's This Morning as the showbiz reporter, having interviewing many celebrities.

Career

Since leaving the Big Brother house, Hammond has appeared on many television programmes, including Celebrity Fit Club, Celebrities Under Pressure and Big Star's Little Star. She has also appeared on Celebrity Stars in Their Eyes, performing as Nina Simone, Celebrity Ready Steady Cook, Daily Cooks Challenge, as a panellist on ITV's Loose Women, and as a presenter on the short-lived ITV Play channel. 

In 2004, Hammond played herself as a TV reporter in Christmas Lights opposite Robson Green.

In 2008, Hammond was named as the face of online bingo site Crown Bingo and took part in live chats, voiced characters and can be heard as the bingo caller in the bingo room. 

In November 2010, Hammond entered the jungle as a contestant on the tenth series of I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! and, on 28 November 2010, became the fourth contestant to leave the show.

In 2012, Hammond became brand ambassador for DFS Home Furnishings. 

Hammond participated in the ninth series of Celebrity MasterChef on BBC One.

Hammond participated in the twelfth series of Strictly Come Dancing in 2014 on BBC One. She partnered with eleventh series' champion Aljaž Skorjanec. They were voted off in the seventh week of competition and finished 10th.

Alison has appeared in many pantomime productions including Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, Jack and the Beanstalk, Beauty and the Beast and is set to appear in Aladdin at the Sunderland Empire this Christmas.

Personal life

Hammond's father is Nevisian and her mother is Guyanese. She was formerly a holiday representative and holiday entertainer, who worked in Tunisia, amongst other resorts. She also worked as a cinema usherette and child actress. Hammond resides in Birmingham her home city and has a son, Aiden.

Filmography

Guest appearances

	Celebrities Under Pressure (July 2004) 

	Hell's Kitchen (April 2009) 

	Hole in the Wall (October 2009) 

	Angela and Friends (January 2010) - 3 Episodes 

	All Star Family Fortunes (December 2010) - Contestant - This Morning vs Emmerdale

	Celebrity Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? (December 2012) - Contestant

	Big Star's Little Star (9 April 2014) - Contestant

	Weekend (3 May 2014) - Herself

	Who's Doing the Dishes? (2014) - Celebrity contestant

	Celebrity Squares (19 April 2015) - Guest


