
#Article: Skeet Ulrich
#Type: regular article

Skeet Ulrich (born Bryan Ray Trout; January 20, 1970) is an American actor known for his roles in popular 90s films, as Billy Loomis in Scream and Chris Hooker in The Craft. He established a following after starring in the cult ABC drama Miracles. Another notable role of his is as Johnston Jacob "Jake" Green, Jr., in the television series Jericho. Ulrich is also known for his role as L.A.P.D. Detective Rex Winters, a former Marine from the Law and Order franchise.

Early life

Ulrich was born Bryan Ray Trout in Lynchburg, Virginia. He was raised in Concord, North Carolina by his mother, Carolyn Elaine Wax (née Rudd), who owns the special events marketing agency Sports Management Group. Ulrich's father is a restaurateur, and his first stepfather was D. K. Ulrich, a NASCAR driver and team owner. Trout's mother has since remarried to Edward Lewis Wax. Ulrich's maternal uncle is retired NASCAR Sprint Cup driver Ricky Rudd, and his maternal grandfather was Alvin Ray Rudd, Sr., the president of Al Rudd Auto Parts.

The nickname "Skeet" originated from the nickname "Skeeter" he was given by his Little League coach because of his small stature. Along with his slight frame, he had poor health, including numerous bouts with pneumonia; he underwent open heart surgery at the age of 10.  Ulrich graduated from Northwest Cabarrus High School. After enrolling at the University of North Carolina at Wilmington to study Marine Biology, he switched to New York University, where he was noticed by playwright David Mamet.

Career

In his earliest screen appearances, Ulrich was an uncredited extra in films Weekend at Bernie's (1989) and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1990). After joining the Atlantic Theater Company as an apprentice, Ulrich performed with the group, which got him noticed by director Stacy Cochran. She cast him in a CBS Schoolbreak Special. With her help he also received his first notable role on screen in 1996 as the loutish boyfriend of Winona Ryder in Boys. That same year he appeared in The Craft opposite Robin Tunney and Neve Campbell. He was also cast that same year to star alongside Neve Campbell, again, in Wes Craven's hit slasher film Scream.

In 1997, he had a small role as an emotionally conflicted gay hustler in As Good as It Gets (along with fellow Scream actor Jamie Kennedy). He appeared in films like The Newton Boys (1998) and Chill Factor (1999). He starred as Juvenal, a young man with stigmata and healing powers in the Paul Schrader film Touch (1997), and he appeared in Ride with the Devil (1999), an American Civil War drama directed by Ang Lee. In 2000, he played computer hacker Kevin Mitnick in the film Takedown.

On television, Ulrich starred in the short-lived ABC series Miracles and appeared in TNT's multiple Emmy-nominated miniseries Into the West (2005 in the US, 2006 in the UK). Also in 2005, Ulrich acted with Keri Russell in the television film The Magic of Ordinary Days. Ulrich starred as Jake Green on the CBS post-apocalyptic drama Jericho, which premiered on September 20, 2006 and ended its run on March 25, 2008.

Ulrich is a recurring guest voice actor on the Adult Swim animated stop-motion sketch comedy series Robot Chicken. In sketches based on G.I. Joe, Ulrich voices the character Duke.

Ulrich guest starred in three episodes of CSI: NY as a complex and disturbed killer. The episodes began airing October 7, 2009.

He signed on to star in Law & Order: LA as LAPD Det. Rex Winters but was released from his contract. His character was killed in a drive-by shooting of his house in the ninth episode.

Personal life

In 1997, Ulrich married English actress Georgina Cates, whom he met at an Academy Award party. Their wedding was a small ceremony held on their farmland in Madison County, Virginia, with only the preacher and their canine companions as guests. Together, the couple have twins, son Jakob Dylan and daughter Naiia Rose, born in 2001. Skeet and Georgina divorced in 2005, citing irreconcilable differences. He married Amelia Jackson-Gray in 2012, and they divorced in 2015.

Filmography

Awards and nominations


