
#Article: Alison Starling
#Type: regular article

Alison Loll Starling-Alexander (born October 28, 1973) is an American television news anchor and journalist. She is a co-anchor of WJLA-TV's weekday 4 PM, 5PM and 11PM newscasts.

Early life

Alison Loll Starling was born on October 28, 1973 to mother Ellen Cooper Starling (née Loll) and father Jim Starling. She has a sister Jennifer, who goes by Jinna.

Starling is from a military family and spent part of her childhood in the Washington D.C. metropolitan area while her father worked for the Office of the United States Trade Representative. She later returned to DC to be a congressional intern.

Starling graduated from University of Florida in 1995. After graduating from college, Starling earned a Cultural Ambassadorial Scholarship from Rotary International to study in Tours, France for six months in 1995.

Career

Early career

Her career began at WDEF-TV in Chattanooga, Tennessee as a reporter and anchor. Next she worked for three years  at KIRO-TV in Seattle, Washington where she covered the Seattle Earthquake.

Current

Starling joined WJLA-TV in August 2003. Just one year later Starling became co-anchor of Good Morning Washington(5-7AM) and ABC7 News at Noon. In 2005, Washingtonian named her one of the area’s rising stars in local television news.

She was previously the co-anchor of the early morning program "Good Morning Washington".

In addition, she also anchors Politico.com's "Playback" video segment--"where we watch so you don't have to"—which shows excerpts of late night television shows discussing political news.

Personal

Starling met NBC News correspondent Peter Alexander when they worked together in Seattle in 2001, however they didn't begin dating until Alexander was assigned to DC in 2009. In August 2011 they became engaged in France. They married Saturday April 21, 2012 atop the Newseum in Washington DC.  In February 2013 she announced her pregnancy  and shared she is having a girl.  Starling gave birth to an eight-pound, one ounce girl named Ava Starling Alexander on July 23, 2013.On December 11, 2014, the Washington Post noted that Starling is expecting the couple's second child. On June 16, 2015, she gave birth to her second child, a daughter named Emma Pink Alexander.


