
#Article: Allison Keith
#Type: regular article

Allison Keith-Shipp is an American voice actress who is best known for her English-dubbing work with ADV Films on such anime movies and television series as Neon Genesis Evangelion, in which she voiced the character Misato Katsuragi. Keith was introduced to voice acting by Amanda Winn Lee when they were in an improv troupe together, and began with the part of Gamera in Gunsmith Cats; she cites Sakura in Blue Seed as her favorite character. She has a bachelors degree in theatre from the University of Houston, and a teachers certification. She used to live in New York and Los Angeles doing occasional work for Central Park Media and Bandai Entertainment. Recently, she reprised her role as Misato Katsuragi for the Rebuild of Evangelion films for Funimation, and has been doing work at Seraphim Digital/Sentai Filmworks.

Personal life

Allison is married to Todd Shipp, and they have two children: son Noah and daughter Ryan. When not voice acting, she works part-time as a teacher.

Filmography

Voice Roles

	 .hack//Legend of the Twilight - Rena

	 AKB0048 - Mikako 'Mii-chan' Minamino

	 Akame ga Kill! - Leone

	 All Purpose Cultural Cat Girl Nuku Nuku - Atsuko 'Nuku Nuku' Natsume

	 Blue Seed - Sakura Yamazaki

	 The Book of Bantorra - Ia, Old Woman

	 Burn Up Excess - Nanvel

	 Burn Up W - Maria

	 Colorful - Professor Pamela

	 Coyote Ragtime Show - May

	 Cyber Team in Akihabara - Kamome Sengakuji

	 Dirty Pair Flash - Lilly (Ep. 5-6)

	 Ef: A Fairy Tale of the Two - Nagi Hirono

	 Ellcia - Nera

	 Full Metal Panic! series - Melissa Mao, Tomomi Isomura

	 Golden Boy - Naoko Katsuda

	 Gravion - Leele (as Allison Shipp)

	 IS (Infinite Stratos) - Tabane Shinonono

	 Majikoi! - Oh! Samurai Girls - Cookie

	 Megazone 23 - Yui Takanaka* Momo: The Girl God of Death - Wako Miyazaki (Ep. 5)* Neon Genesis Evangelion / Rebuild of Evangelion series - Misato Katsuragi* Puni Puni Poemy - Reporter* RahXephon - Cathy McMahon* Rune Soldier - Merrill* Saiyuki - Kanan

	 Steel Angel Kurumi - Misaki Kagura, Nadeshiko

	 Strange Love - Azumi Yamada

	 Suikoden Demon Century - Kiyomi Suga

	 Super Atragon - Sabra

	 Super GALS! - Miyu's Mother (Ep. 25)

	 Tactics - Preview Narrator

	 Tsuritama - Keito Sanada


