
#Article: Amer Kamfar
#Type: regular article

Amer Mohammed Kamfar (عامر محمد كمفار, ʿĀmar Muḥammad Kamfār) is a licensed Saudi pilot and turbojet engineer (also referred to as Amer Taiybkamfar, but who personally preferred the name John) who was initially reported to be one of the hijackers aboard American Airlines Flight 11 as part of the September 11, 2001 attacks. Later he was described as (his) name appeared on the list of passengers on board the United Airlines flight.

Biography

Kamfar's drivers' license was issued in Venice, Los Angeles, California, where he had lived until moving to Vero Beach in June 2000. His address in Vero Beach was 2095 Ninth Place, which he rented. His lease indicated that he had worked for Saudi Arabian Airlines for 18 years, and had five children between 4 and 16 years old. (Neighbour Jack Rhodes stated only "three young children".)

FBI Report

When it was discovered he was alive, FBI reports considered him "connected to the attacks" and warned that the Vero Beach, Florida, resident should be considered dangerous as he was likely armed with an AK-47. It was also announced that he drove a silver 1996 Plymouth Voyager with Florida license-plate D97 RFU, although he would later come forward and announce he had never owned any such car.

Later Stories

Later stories claimed he was the victim of identity theft and one of the actual hijackers had used stolen identity cards, which may explain why he was initially reported to have lived with Abdulaziz al-Omari at several times. The media also painted a suspicious picture of Kamfar, stating that he had "rushed off to Rooms to Go, a furniture store in Vero Beach, and as news of the kamikaze attacks was breaking on a television in the showroom, bought a $1,795 living room set.", while reflecting on the fact his wife wore a Muslim chador.

Kamfar was alternately listed as sharing a post-office box with an unnamed hijacker http://www.rumormillnews.com/cgi-bin/config.pl?read=11575, and living with, or next-door to Abdulaziz al-Omari, or next-door to, Adnan Bukhari or Hani Hanjour. However, the latter claim is odd since Hanjour never lived in either California or Florida, and Adnan Bukhari was later cleared of any wrongdoing concerning the 9/11 attacks.

Following 9/11

He was later found to have returned to Makkah Province in Saudi Arabia, and cooperated with ongoing investigations.


