
#Article: Andrew Firestone
#Type: regular article

Andrew Boulton Firestone (born July 10, 1975) is an American TV reality show personality. He is the son of Brooks Firestone, a grandson of Leonard Firestone, and a great-grandson of Firestone Tire and Rubber Company founder Harvey Firestone and Idabelle Smith.

Early life

Educated at Stevenson School, he graduated from the University of San Diego in business administration where he also was a member of the football team, in 1998.

Career

Professional CareerAndrew Firestone is Principal and Founder of StonePark Capital, a Santa Barbara based hospitality firm that focuses on the acquisition and development of select service hotels, and applies a disciplined set of strategies which prioritizes investor return. Currently StonePark capital has projects in Santa Barbara, Morgan Hill, and San Luis Obispo CA. 

The Bachelor

Firestone was the third bachelor on the ABC reality series The Bachelor. On the show, premiered in March 2003, Firestone courted 25 bachelorettes, progressively eliminating them, and eventually selected one of the group for a continuing relationship. Andrew selected and proposed to Jen Schefft, who accepted and moved to California to be with him. The couple decided to go their separate ways in December 2003, but remained friends.

Other television appearances

In 2005, Firestone participated in the fifth Celebrity Poker Showdown tournament on Bravo. He won his first round game, but placed third in the tournament championship. Firestone played for the charity Direct Relief.

In 2006, Firestone appeared in an episode of VH1's Celebrity Paranormal Project.

Firestone is the host of a lifestyles series entitled Billionaires Car Club, distributed by American Television Distribution. It first aired in May 2008.

Firestone also made an appearance on episode two of Flavor of Love Girls: Charm School on VH1.

Firestone and his wife have appeared in television advertisements for the Baby Bullet.

Personal life

On July 5, 2008, Firestone married actress/model Ivana Bozilovic at St. Mark's in the Valley Episcopal Church in Los Olivos, California. Firestone and Bozilovic have three children: sons Adam Brooks (born March 21, 2009) and Shane (born January 27, 2014), and daughter Anja Jasmine (born April 15, 2011).


