
#Article: Andrew Jayamanne
#Type: regular article

Andrew Jayamanne ඇන්ඩෘ ජයමාන්න (alternative spelling Andrew Jayamanna, 9 November 1943 - 29 August 2014) was a Sri Lankan cinematographer, and film and television director and producer.

Early life

Jayamanne is the eldest of ten children born to Vincent Jayamanne and his wife Beatrice Perera. He was raised in Periyamulla in Negombo, the town on the Western sea-coast where his father was born. Jayamanne did his elementary studies at St. Anthony's boys' School, Dalupotha, Negombo. In 1955 he joined the Archdiocesan College of St.Aloysius, Colombo, with the intention of becoming a Catholic priest. But due to a health condition, on doctor's advice he had to abandon his studies and engage in manual labour.

Career beginnings

While at college, Jayamanne's teachers recognised his love of photography and assigned him to handle the cinema and audio visual equipment in the college. Later he joined the Radio & Electronics Laboratory at Kotahena. 

In 1962, he joined Vijaya Film Studios and Laboratories of Cinemas Limited, at Hendala, Wattala. In 1962 he started his career as an assistant cameraman at the Vijaya Studios. As an assistant cameraman and camera-unit in-charge he worked on over 40 feature films, both domestic and international. This gave him the opportunity to work under many cinematographers and to study film laboratory techniques, sound studio work, film editing, production designing and production management.

Professional career

While working at Vijaya Studios, Jayamanne met Sri Lankan director Titus Thotawatta. In 1970, he left Vijaya to join Thotawatta in the production of Haralaksaya, marking his debut as Director of Cinematography. Jayamanne continued to work as Thotawatta's principle cinematographer through the latter's final film Handaya.

Jayamanne was employed by many other veteran directors, and became a favourite of new directors for their debut projects. His contribution to the films of Dharmasiri Bandaranayake, Vasantha Obeysekera and Parakrama Niriella were highly acclaimed by cinema critics and Journalists of Sri Lanka. In 1972, when the State Film Corporation called for registration of cinema technicians, Jayamanne registered as film director, script writer, cinematographer, film editor and production manager. He is the only person in Sri Lanka to have been registered in five categories.

Instructor

In 1972, Jayamanne was invited to conduct classes for beginners interested in cinema and television at the Paul VI center, Fort, Colombo, organised by the OCIC Sri Lanka. He started training with Super 8 format and slide show programs. Then as VHS came to industry it was introduced to beginners. He held two short film festivals with his students at Sri Lanka Foundation Institute.

In 1983 Jayamanne had the opportunity to attend a professional video program training offered in Taipei by Santa Clara University. Jayamanne was subsequently called up by the Television Training Institute, Sri Lanka to train video technicians for Rupavahini and ITN, the two national television channels. The courses were later extended to train video teams of the Army, Navy, Police, Education, Agricultural, health, and many other government institutes.

In 1986 Andrew Jayamanne was commissioned to train the staff of ITN network studios. During this course several practical programs were produced. The long-running ITN serial Kopi Kade is an offshoot of these training classes. "Kopi Kade" drama was designed to be a low cost a multi-camera production by shooting and editing on line within few hours.

Jayamanne organised another 6 months course for "Television Program Production Training Institute" for Media Centre at Deans Road, Colombo. Six of these programs were conducted.

During 1992 and 1993, Jayamanne was retained as a visiting lecturer at Sri Jayawardanapura University and Sri Lanka Foundation Institute, Colombo.

He extended the video production training classes to remote areas like Trincomalee (three programs), Horuwpatana (one program) and Negombo (two programs). These were conducted as one week full-time courses. The students were trained to use available still or mobile phone cameras for creating short films.

In 2002 He was called up by the Vietnam Television channels workers forum to conduct a workshop in Saigon.

Filmography

Producer and director

	 Cigarette Butt කොටය (1971) (35 mm short): represented Sri Lanka at the 1971 Popoli Film Festival

	 Documentary film (1971) (35mm short) on the visit of Pope Paul VI to Sri Lanka. වන පාවුලු පාප් තුමාගේ ලංකා ගමන

	 Flower in Bloom කුසුම (1973)(Super 8 short): presented at the 1973 OCIC Short Film Festival in Manila

	 Behind the Cinema of Sri Lanka (1983) A documentary on making of Sri Lankan films. Produced by OCIC Sri Lanka (45 minutes / 35mm /B&W)

	 Life of Joseph Vass ජෝසප් වාස් ජීවන චරිතය (40 minutes / 35mm documentary), produced for Government Film Unit of Sri Lanka

Cinematographer

Television director

	 Kopi Kade කඩේ (ITN channel; 56 episodes) Jayamanne served as the inaugural director of this long-running Sri Lankan serial.

Television producer

	 Gama Witthi විත්ති: Rupavahini (12 episodes)

	 Dharmadhikaranaya ධර්මාධිකරණය: ITN channel (52 episodes).

	 Sanathana Kathandara කතන්දර: Rupavahini (6 episodes)

	 Siri Nivesa නිවස: Sirasa channel (6 episodes)

	 Sasala Ruwa රුව: Swarnavahini channel (22 episodes)

	 Chala Achala අචල: Swarnavahini channel (22 episodes)

	 Rankira Sooya සොයා: Swarnavahini channel (22 episodes) 

	 Damayanthi දමයන්ති: Awaiting release (20 episodes)

Miscellaneous

	 Technical director of Sudu Salu සලු 2002 (digital to film)

	 Videographer of Sammy Povel's Music Garden 1992 (digital to film)

Awards and recognition

Cinematographer awards

	 Haralakshaya හාරලක්සය 1979 - SIGNIS Award; Critics cinema award

	 Handaya හඳයා - SIGNIS Award; President's cinema awards

	 Mangala මංගලා - Critics cinema awards

	 Maruwa Samaga Vase සමග වාසේ - Critics cinema awards

	 Palagatiyo පලගැටියෝ 1979 - Sarasaviya Best Cinematographer Award; President's cinema awards

	 Siri Madura නිවස - Sarasaviya Best Cinematographer Award; President's cinema awards

	 Hansa Wilak විලක් - Critics cinema awards

	 Thunveni Yamaya යාමය - Sarasaviya Best Cinematographer Award; President's cinema awards

	 Suddilage Kathawa කතාව - Critics cinema awards

	 Julietge Bhoomikawa භුමිකාව - SIGNIS Award; Critics cinema awards

	 Sayelama සෙයිලම 1993 - President's cinema awards

	 Sathipooja සතිපූජා - President's cinema awards

Other recoginition

	 Jayamanne is a member in the Advisory board of the Religious programs in Rupavahini / ITN and Sri Lanka Broadcasting corporation.

	 Jayamanne was honoured as "KALA SURU" by The Cultural Guild of Sri Lanka Catholic Organization.

	 Jayamanne is appointed as "Justice of Peace - All Island"

	 In 1985 and 1986 Jayamanne was invited to attend the International Film and teachers seminar organised by the CDG of Germany in Mannheim.

Personal life

Married in 1972 To Bernadette Tissera. After marriage they moved to Eattukala, Negombo. They had 3 sons:

	 Asith Chaminda Jayamanne 1973

	 Dulip Lasantha Jayamanne 1975

	 Susith Eranda Jayamanne 1982

His wife died in 1990 after a long battle with cancer.


