
#Article: Anwar Choudhury
#Type: regular article

Anwar Choudhury (আনোয়ার চৌধুরী; born 15 June 1959) is a British diplomat who is the present UK Ambassador to Peru. He was formerly the Director of International Institutions at the Foreign & Commonwealth Office. He was a High Commissioner to Bangladesh, Although born in Sylhet Division, in north-eastern Bangladesh, he is a naturalised British citizen; Choudhury has dismissed suggestions of a conflict of loyalty, stating that he would support the English cricket team against Bangladesh (see: Cricket test).

Early life

Choudhury was born in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh). His family is originally from Prabhakarpur, Jagannathpur, Sunamganj, and moved to the United Kingdom when he was young.

Education

Choudhury followed an unusual route to the Diplomatic Service; in 1985, he attained a BSc in Electrical and Electronic Engineering from the University of Salford. Choudhury worked at Siemens Plessey, before entering the civil service as an engineering strategist with the Royal Air Force. In 1995, he graduated with an Master of Business Administration from Durham University.

Career

Choudhury was promoted through the Ministry of Defence, until 2000, when he was recruited by the Cabinet Office, before being headhunted for the position of High Commissioner to Bangladesh. He was succeeded in 2008 by Stephen Evans. When he was appointed as High Commissioner to Bangladesh in 2004, he became one of the first two British ambassadors from ethnic minority backgrounds to be appointed (the other being Alp Mehmet, who was appointed Ambassador to Iceland).

Grenade attack

On 21 May 2004, Choudhury was targeted in a failed grenade attack, in which he was wounded and two bystanders were killed. The attempted assassination came as he was leaving the Dargah-e-Shah Jalal mosque in Sylhet, his home province, following Jumu'ah (Friday prayers). Three attackers were sentenced to death for the attack.

Personal life

Choudhury's main interests include folk music of Bengal (baul). He's also passionate about community integration and protection of the UK abroad. He is married to Momina Choudhury, has two daughters and a son, and he has three brothers. His hobbies include playing cricket, bridge and Bangladeshi cuisine.

See also

	British Bangladeshi

	List of British Bangladeshis

	List of High Commissioners of the United Kingdom to Bangladesh

	List of diplomats of the United Kingdom to Peru


