
#Article: Grant Shapps
#Type: regular article

Grant Shapps (born 14 September 1968) is a British Conservative Party politician, former Minister of State at the Department for International Development. A former co-chairman of the Conservative Party, he is the member of parliament for Welwyn Hatfield in England. He first won the seat, as Grant V Shapps, in the general election of 5 May 2005. Shapps was returned to parliament in the May 2010 election with a majority of 17,423, which fell to 12,153 in 2015. On 9 June 2010, Shapps was appointed as a Privy Counsellor. 

On 4 September 2012, he was appointed Conservative Party Co-Chairman, replacing Baroness Warsi; he was also appointed Minister without portfolio in the Cabinet Office. His salary was paid by the party. On 11 May 2015, Shapps lost his positions as Conservative party co-chairman and minister without portfolio at the Cabinet Office, and was instead appointed minister of state at the Department for International Development. On 28 November 2015, he stood down from his ministerial appointment due to allegations of bullying within the Conservative Party.

Family and early life

Shapps was born in Croxley Green, Watford, Hertfordshire, to a Jewish family. He was educated at Yorke Mead Primary School, Watford Grammar School for Boys, and Cassio College. He completed a business and finance course at Manchester Polytechnic, and received a Higher National Diploma.Shapps was also National President of the Jewish youth organisation BBYO. In 1989, according to Shapps, he was in a car crash in Kansas, United States, that left him in a coma for a week.

He married Belinda Goldstone in 1997 and they have three children. In 1999 Shapps was diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma and underwent chemotherapy and radiotherapy recovering from cancer by the following year. As a result of the effects of chemotherapy, his children were conceived by IVF. 

Shapps' brother, Andre Shapps, is a musician. Between 1994 and 1998, Andre Shapps was a member of Big Audio Dynamite (BAD), playing keyboards. The Shapps' cousin, Mick Jones, was a key figure in the British punk rock of the late 1970s and a founding member of both the Clash and Big Audio Dynamite.

Political career

Parliamentary candidacy

Shapps unsuccessfully contested the seat of North Southwark and Bermondsey during the 1997 election as the Conservative Party candidate.

Shapps stood for the Welwyn Hatfield constituency in the 2001 election, again unsuccessfully. He was reselected to fight Welwyn Hatfield in 2002 and continued his local campaigning over the next four years.

Member of Parliament

Shapps stood again in the 2005 election and was elected as the Conservative MP for Welwyn Hatfield, defeating the Labour MP and Minister for Public Health, Melanie Johnson. He received 22,172 votes (49.6%) and had a majority of 5,946 (13.3%), recording the second highest swing from Labour to Conservative in the 2005 election of 8.2%.

Shapps publicly backed David Cameron's bid for the leadership of the Conservative Party, seconding Cameron's nomination papers. Upon Cameron's election as party leader Shapps was appointed vice chairman of the Conservative Party with responsibility for campaigning.

He was a member of the Public Administration Select Committee between May 2005 and February 2007.

In the 2010 election, he was re-elected with a further 11.1% swing and a majority of 17,423, taking 57% of the vote.

Shadow housing minister

In June 2007, Shapps became shadow housing minister, outside the shadow cabinet, but entitled to attend its meetings.

He was shadow housing minister during the period of the last four Labour government housing ministers. During this period of opposition he argued in favour of a community-up approach to solving the housing crisis and warned against top-down Whitehall driven housing targets, which he believed had failed in the past.

In April 2009, Shapps launched the Conservative party's ninth green paper on policy, "Strong Foundations". In early 2010 Shapps published a series of six speeches in a pamphlet called "Home Truths".

Minister of State for Housing and Local Government

In May 2010, Shapps became housing and local government minister within the Communities and Local Government department and immediately repealed Home Information Pack (HIP) legislation. He chaired the Cross-Ministerial Working Group on Homelessness which includes ministers from eight Government departments. The group introduced "No Second Night Out", a policy designed to prevent rough sleeping nationwide.

As Minister of State for Housing, Shapps promoted plans for flexible rent and controversially ended automatic lifetime social tenancies. He also introduced the New Homes Bonus which rewarded councils for building more homes. He denied claims that changes in Housing Benefit rules would be unfair claiming that ordinary people could no longer afford some of the homes paid for by the £24bn Housing Benefit bill. Shapps championed Tenant Panels.

At the 2011 party conference, Shapps backed the expansion of right to buy with the income being spent on replacing the sold housing with new affordable housing on a one for one basis.

In 2012, Shapps launched StreetLink - a website and phone app for the public to bring help to rough sleepers.

Conservative Party co-chairman

In September 2012, Shapps was appointed Co-Chairman of the Conservative Party in Cameron's first major reshuffle.

On arrival Shapps set about preparing Conservative Campaign Headquarters for the 2015 election by installing an election countdown clock.

In November 2012, Shapps hired Australian strategist Lynton Crosby to provide strategic advice and run the 2015 election campaign. Credited with helping John Howard to win three Australian elections and the re-election of Boris Johnson as Mayor of London, Crosby is a controversial figure who was accused of having influenced government smoking policy in July 2013.

In March 2013, Shapps defended the Welfare Reform Act 2012 (often referred to as the "Bedroom Tax") saying his own children share a bedroom. Some were critical of him for comparing his privileged situation with that of a family receiving housing benefit. Others argued that Shapps was right to point out that families who are not on welfare should not have to pay for additional bedrooms. At the same time Shapps was criticized by Andrew Dilnot, Chairman of the UK Statistics Authority, for wrongly claiming that nearly one million people on disability benefits had dropped their claims rather than face medical checks. The real figure was 19,700.In September 2013, Shapps complained to the Secretary-General of the United Nations about a press release issued in its name claiming that the government's Spare Room Subsidy policy went against human rights.

In October 2013, Shapps used a Daily Telegraph interview to say that the BBC could lose the right to all of the licence fee if it did not resolve its "culture of waste and secrecy". He also suggested that the organisation was biased against the Tory Party, saying it did not "apply fairness in both directions" and that there was a "question of credibility for the organisation". The licence fee might be withdrawn if it did not address this. His comments sparked a vigorous response from a former BBC Director General Greg Dyke who said that "politicians shouldn't define partiality". Others, including the current BBC Director General Tony Hall echoed some of Shapps's comments by saying that the "BBC needs to start treating public money as its own."

In March 2014, Shapps drew national headlines for a tweet in support of the 2014 budget. Opponents criticised Shapps of being patronising to working people by reducing their hobbies to bingo and beer.

He ceased being co-chairman of the Conservative Party in May 2015.

Minister of State, Department for International Development

On 11 May 2015, Shapps was sacked from the cabinet, which he had attended as Conservative party co-chairman and minister without portfolio at the Cabinet Office, and appointed as minister of state at the Department for International Development. BBC political correspondent Chris Mason said the change appeared to be a demotion, while The Guardians chief political correspondent, Nicholas Watt, went further, calling it “a humiliating blow”. 

On 28 November 2015, Shapps stood down as minister of state due to allegations of bullying within the Conservative Party. It has been claimed that Shapps, in his previous role as party co-chairman, had ignored repeated allegations of bullying involving Mark Clarke (the then party youth organiser); Clarke denies all allegations. The alleged bullying may have caused a young party member, Elliott Johnson, to commit suicide. The day before Shapps resignation, Johnsons father had called on Shapps to step down and made the following comments:

Public behaviour

Donations

In May 2008, Shapps was cited as one of several shadow ministers who had received cash from firms linked to their portfolios. The donors were originally recruited by Michael Gove who previously held the shadow housing portfolio. The Conservative party said shadow ministers had not been influenced by donations. "Some Conservative policy on housing is actually against the policy of the donors", said a Conservative spokesman.  Shadow ministers are allowed to receive donations from organisations covered by their brief as long as the person has a company in the UK or lives in the UK. The Commissioner exonerated all shadow cabinet members involved.

Pseudonym and second job denials

His use of the pen names Michael Green and Sebastian Fox attracted controversy in 2012. Shapps denied having used the pseudonym after entering Parliament and, in 2014, threatened legal action against a constituent who had stated on Facebook that he had. In February 2015 he told LBC Radio presenter Shelagh Fogarty, "Let me get this absolutely clear...I don't have a second job and have never had a second job while being an MP. End of story." In March 2015 Shapps admitted to having had a second job whilst being an MP and practising business under a pseudonym. In his admission he stated that he had 'over-firmly denied' having a second job. In March 2015, Dean Archer, the constituent previously threatened with legal action by Shapps, warned Shapps he was considering legal action against him.

The nature of Green's web marketing business was also criticised in the media. The 20/20 Challenge publication cost $497 and promised customers earnings of $20,000 in 20 days. Upon purchase, the "toolkit" was revealed to be an ebook, advising the user to create their own toolkit and recruit 100 "Joint Venture Partners" to resell it for a share of the profits.

Allegations of Wikipedia editing

In 2012 the Guardian reported that Shapps' Wikipedia article had been edited from his office to remove embarrassing information and correct an error. Shapps stated that he had not touched his Wikipedia biography for years and that he only edited to make it more accurate. During the 2015 general election campaign the Guardian reported allegations by a Wikipedia administrator that Shapps had used a sockpuppet account, Contribsx, to remove embarrassing material from his own Wikipedia page and make "largely unflattering" edits to articles about other politicians, including some in his own party. Shapps denied the allegations; the Telegraph claimed his accuser was a "Liberal Democrat activist". Wikipedia's Arbitration Committee found there was "no significant evidence" to link the Contribsx account to Shapps. Wikipedia censured the administrator responsible for the allegation, investigation, comments to the Guardian and the blocking of the Contribsx account. Another administrator removed the block placed on the Contribsx account.

Documents obtained by The Spectator show that an email sent around the board of Wikimedia UK expressed relief that Shapps had not lost his seat, because otherwise the organisation "would be open to the accusation that the charity had acted in a partisan manner during an election period".

Professional and writing career

In 1990, aged 22, Shapps founded PrintHouse Corporation, a design, print, website creation and marketing business in London, based on a collapsed printing business he purchased from the receiver. He stepped down as a director in 2009, but remained the majority shareholder.

Shapps founded a web publishing business, How To Corp Limited, with his wife while he was recovering from cancer. The company marketed business publications and software. Shapps stood down as a director in July 2008; his wife remained as director until the company was dissolved in 2014.


