
#Article: Avery Haines
#Type: regular article

Avery Haines (born ) is an award winning Canadian television journalist currently working for Citytv.

Career

Born in New Mexico, United States, Haines began her career as a reporter for CFRB in Toronto. In late 1999, she began to work as a fill-in anchor for CTV Newsnet.

On 15 January 2000, working a shift for the news channel, Haines made a mistake with a line while taping a report introduction. After regaining her composure, she joked: 

However, the camera was still on. Haines retaped the segment, but later that day, a CTV technician mistakenly aired the tape which included the error and the comment.

On 17 January, Haines was fired from CTV Newsnet after her comments sparked controversy. The unnamed technician was suspended.

Haines was soon hired by Citytv Toronto as a health reporter. In fall 2001, she began hosting Health On the Line, which aired on Life Network and Discovery Health, but is now out of production.

On 15 September 2010, Haines returned to Citytv as a senior reporter and anchor. Haines has written and hosted the Inside Story aired on Citytv since 26 January 2012.

Family

She is the sister of Emily Haines, lead singer of the band Metric. Both Avery and Emily are daughters of the late Paul Haines, noted poet and librettist of Escalator over the Hill which was co-written with Carla Bley.

Awards

Her television programme Health On the Line won Gemini Awards in 2002 and 2005 for Best Talk Series. In 2005, she was personally nominated for a Gemini in a hosting/interviewer category.In 2013 Haines' Inside Story was awarded the Media Award by the Tema Conter Memorial Trust, 'Best In-depth Television Reporting' by The Radio Television Digital News Association (RTDNA) and the Canadian Medical Association Media Award  'Excellence in Health Reporting for the Inside Story: "Dystonia"'. In 2014 the Inside Story was nominated for three Canadian Screen Awards including Best Local Reportage and Best News Information Segment. In 2015 she received another Canadian Screen Awards nomination for Best Local Reportage for When the Blue Line Flatlines.


