
#Article: Barbara Chernow
#Type: regular article

Barbara Chernow is an American educator and since February 2012, Senior Vice President for Administration at Stony Brook University.

Early life and education

Born in New Hyde Park, Long Island, raised in Brooklyn and Staten Island, Chernow attended Susan E. Wagner High School in Staten Island. She went on to attend Brown University and graduated with a BA in Economics and a minor in Education. At Brown, she was active among Brown Student Agencies.

Chernow currently resides in Nassau County with her family. Her daughter is a graduate of the University of Vermont and her son graduated from Cornell University.

Work

As Senior Vice-President for Administration, Chernow oversees a consolidated administrative office which includes Facilities and Services, Finance, and Human Resource Services with direct responsibility for all administrative, business and facilities operations, including design and construction activity throughout the University. In this role she assists the President of Stony Brook University Samuel Stanley, MD in defining the future goals and administrative plans for the University. Additionally, she oversees the University Police Department, Environmental Health and Safety, Sustainability Office and Parking and Transportation Services. Chernow is also a member of the Society for College and University Planning (SCUP).

Chernow currently holds the Chair of the Project 50 Forward Operational Excellence Program Management Office, which oversees efforts to streamline procedures, optimize programs and improve support services campus-wide.

During her more than 30-year career, Chernow has held a variety of senior management positions in facilities and operations including serving as the Vice President of Administration for the New York City School Construction Authority. She was also a past recipient of the Executive Leadership Award presented by the National Association of Professional Women in Construction.

Chernow joined Stony Brook University as a special assistant to then President of Stony Brook University, Shirley Strum Kenny. In her previous role as Vice President for Facilities and Services at Stony Brook, she led the development of a new Facilities Master Plan, which has furthered the University's academic, research, and community-building goals. Other accomplishments under her leadership include projects that save energy, reduce pollution and minimize the University's impact on the natural environment.

Since October 2007 Barbara has served as President of the University's Faculty Student Association, the not-for-profit organization that provides dining, retail and other auxiliary services to the Stony Brook campus community. Chernow is also a member of State University of New York Business Officers' Association (SUBOA).


