
#Article: Bey Logan
#Type: regular article

Bey Logan (born 15 November 1961) is an expert on East Asian cinema, particularly Hong Kong action cinema. He is also notable as a screenwriter, film producer and as a martial artist (trained in Hung Gar) who has had (mostly minor) roles in a number of films, including the 2003 Dante Lam film The Twins Effect and the 2014 Teddy Chen actioner 'Kung Fu Jungle'.

He has written a book - Hong Kong Action Cinema, an introduction to the subject. Logan was a founder and editor of Impact magazine, and has provided audio commentaries for over 120 East Asian films released on DVD. He is also an international representative of the Wong Fei Hung Museum in Foshan, Guangdong.

Logan has also worked as a producer on such films as The Twins Effect, Dragon Squad, Blood Bond, Beach Spike, Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon 2: Green Destiny and Lady Bloodfight.

Career

Logan began his career as a writer and editor on martial arts magazine Combat in 1987. In 1992, he was hired to edit the action film magazine Impact published by Roy Jessop & MAI Publications and took the position of Director.12 He later moved to Hong Kong, and wrote the screenplays for the films White Tiger (1996) and Ballistic Kiss (1998).3

In 1998, Logan joined Hong Kong production and distribution company Media Asia Group, where he wrote and co-produced the documentaries Jackie Chan: My Story and Jackie Chan: My Stunts. In 2001, he joined Emperor Multimedia Group and whilst there, contributed to the script along with several other writers for the 2003 film The Medallion.3

In 2003, he founded the company Shankara Productions, in partnership with actress Maggie Q.1 The company's first production was the 2005 film Dragon Squad, which starred Maggie Q, along with Sammo Hung and Michael Biehn (and in which Logan made an appearance).4 He also represented the Sydney-based sales agency Arclight Films, overseeing the release of several Hong Kong films.

Throughout this period, from 1999 until 2005, Logan also worked for Medusa Communications, providing audio commentaries for the UK releases of Hong Kong films on their Hong Kong Legends label, and latterly on other East Asian films on Medusa's Premier Asia label.

In October 2005, shortly after Medusa Communications were bought out by Contender Entertainment Group, Logan left to become Vice President of Asian Acquisitions & Co-Productions at The Weinstein Company, where he oversaw the company's Dragon Dynasty brand, a distributor of East Asian titles. In this capacity he had a hand in acquiring both new and classic films for distribution in the US, some of which had never been released before on DVD. All of the Dragon Dynasty titles to date have contained extensive special features, including interviews, documentaries and audio commentaries. Many of these commentaries feature Logan as either sole commentator, or as host to guest commentators from the industry.

On 1 October 2009, Logan's contract with The Weinstein Company ended. He then embarked on a new career as a film producer in Hong Kong, forming his own production label, B&E Productions (standing for "Breaking and Entering").5 He confirmed that Dragon Dynasty would continue releasing East Asian films after his departure, and that he would retain a consultancy role to assist the company with future acquisitions.6

In March 2010, B&E had their first release, The Blood Bond. This English-language film was Michael Biehn's directorial debut, and stars Biehn along with Simon Yam, Emma Pei and Phoenix Chou. The Blood Bond enjoyed a brief theatrical release in Hong Kong, and subsequently sold around the world. Biehn and Logan both regard the film as a disappointment, the former expressing his discontent in various on-line interviews, while Logan wrote a novel (also entitled 'The Blood Bond') depicting the film he wished he'd made.

Regardless, Logan and B&E Films went on to produce several further films, beginning with Tony Tang-directed animated film Little Gobie, and another film from Tang, the Cantonese language Beach Spike. The latter is an action comedy, combining martial arts and beach volleyball. It stars Chrissie Chau, Jessica C and Phoenix Chou.

'Beach Spike' did decent, if unspectacular, business in Hong Kong and China, and has since become something of a cult classic.

Bey shot one third of his directorial debut, a portmanteau project entitled 'Snowblade', but was then forced to put the rest of the film on hold due to a variety of cast and logistical issues. The film is an exotic, erotic manga-inspired action film, and starred Indonesian-born Chinese actress Sable Yu.

Logan continued to work with The Weinstein Company as a co-producer on 'Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon II: The Green Destiny'. The film stars Donnie Yen and Michelle Yeoh, and was shoot on location in New Zealand and Beijing.

On returning to Hong Kong, Bey wrote and produced 'Lady Bloodfight'. The film focusses on a hidden tournament for women warriors, and is produced with LA-based Voltage Pictures. It stars fan favourite Amy Johnston alongside newcomers Jenny Wu, Muriel Hofmann, Kathy Wu, Jet Tranter, Mayling Ng and Lauren Rhoden. The film's fight scenes were choreographed by Hung Yan Yan, of 'Once Upon a Time in China' series fame.

Bey is also writing his third book, entitled My Life in 36 Chambers, which he describes as an autobiographical approach to 36 classic Hong Kong kung fu films.8

Filmography & DVD commentaries

Logan has worked in the Hong Kong film industry as an actor, screenwriter and producer since 1993. Notably, he wrote the screenplay for Jackie Chan's film, The Medallion (2003) and appeared as a vampire in, The Twins Effect (2003). He also appeared as Officer Kyle in Dragon Squad (2005). He wrote the scripts for the documentaries Jackie Chan: My Story (1998) and Jackie Chan: My Stunts (1999), co-producing the former with Chan.

Logan appeared in an episode of the Fist of Fury television series, in 1995. He also appeared in the documentary Bruce Lee: A Warrior's Journey and wrote and performed voice dubbing in another Lee documentary, Bruce Lee in G.O.D.. On a couple of DVD commentaries for Hong Kong Legends, Logan revealed that he found the long-lost footage filmed by Bruce Lee for Game of Death whilst looking through the vaults of Media Asia (his employers at the time). This footage was subsequently released on the bonus disc of the Hong Kong Legends release of Game of Death, as well as on the Warner Home Video release of the documentary Bruce Lee: A Warrior's Journey.

Logan is also noted for his many audio commentaries on international DVD releases of East Asian (predominantly Hong Kong) films, earning him a place in Empire magazine's "Ten Heroes of DVD". He has recorded 123 film commentaries to date, his latest being for the UK DVD releases of Detective Dee and the Mystery of the Phantom Flame, Woochi The Demon Slayer and Young Bruce Lee, all in collaboration with Mike Leeder, and the forthcoming Shaolin, which he has recorded solo. The commentaries Logan has recorded, by label, are as follows:

Personal life

Logan was raised by adoptive parents, Maurice and Catherine. Thanks to them, Logan was educated at Uppingham School, a Public School in Rutland.

In his late 20s, Bey learned he is the son of Adelaide-based lawyer David Gilfillan and Cherie Ceberano. He has a number of Australian half-siblings, including legendary Aussie songstress Kate Ceberano. His step-father is Australian karate pioneer Tino Ceberano.

He has been based in Hong Kong since 1993. In 1996 he married Ponnie Leung, and they had three children together (Ryan, Calvin and Kyle) before getting divorced in 2004 . He now has twins, a boy and girl (Sean and Taia) with Hong Kong-based lawyer Elizabeth Yang.


