
#Article: Bhimrao Panchale
#Type: regular article

Bhimrao Panchale (भीमराव पांचाळे ; 30 March 1951) is noted Marathi poet and Ghazal singer from the state of Maharashtra, India. He is known as Ghazal Nawaz (Prince of Ghazals) for his exposition of the ghazal form of poetry and its adaptation to the Marathi language.

Early life and training

Bhimrao Panchale did the schooling in difficult circumstances had an inclination towards music and singing. Bhimrao did his schooling form Amravati, Maharashtra, during schooling he has taken training classes for singing from Pandit. Bhaiyyasaheb Deshpande for a period of 4 years;later he continue taking lessons of singing form Pandit. Ekanathpant Kulkarni Akola, Maharashtra.

Career

After completing 8 years of training Bhimrao started with performance of Sugam Sangeet in different parts of Maharashtra. Later on have started singing in Urdu Ghazal. He learned Urdu language for the love he developed for Ghazal. Later by introducing Marathi Ghazal along with Urdu Ghazal he gave different shaded of Sugam Sangeet (light classical music). To reach Marathi ghazal to large number of audience; he conducted various Mehfil (मैफिल ); all over different places in Maharashatra.Bhimrao gave his first concert in Marathi ghazal in 1972. He started singing Marathi ghazal along with Urdu ghazal on same stage,made the concept very popular in urban as well as rural areas in Maharashatra, from past 40 years Bhimrao is singing Marathi ghazal and still counting. He has introduced many Marathi shayar (poets).

Panchale has been renowned artist of Marathi and Hindi Sugam Sangeet since 1975 and was awarded "A" Grade in Akashavani (All India Radio).

In 2011, a felicitation concert was held in Mumbai, on the occasion of 60th birthday.

Bhimrao Panchale, an inspariation to Marathi Ghazal singers -

Music CD's

Shri Panchale having over 20 Music Albums(Cd's) on Ghazal and devotional Music such as 

	Ek Zakham Sughandhi (1992 - BMG crescendo)

	Shabda Suranchi Bhavyatra (1993 - BMG crescendo)

	Swapna Tarakanche (1994 - BMG crescendo)

	Gazal usne chedi (1996 -oriental)

	Bhavananchi Vaadale (1997 - BMG crescendo)

	Punha Tezab Dukahache (2007- Samvad Music)

	Dukhache zale gaane 2012 (Universal)

Music direction

Bhimrao has distinction of being music director of Morudada Kothiwan's.

Marathi cinema

Bhimrao has done music direction for the different Marathi films

	Zanzawat (;) and 

	Premasakshi (;)

Eminent Singer like Asha Bhosle, Suresh Wadkar, Devki Pandit, Jaywant Kulkarni, Ravindra Saathe, Kavita Krishnamurti have given voice to Shri Panchale's music direction.

Marathi Telefilms

Panchale has done Music direction for the different Telefilms.

	 Mana Sajnna (;)

	 Pankh tutlale pakshi (; )

	 Saakha maza Dnyaneshwar(;) Directed by Shri. Raj-Datta

	 Pankha Tutlale Pakshi(;)

Also Doordershan serial based on Tilak and Agarkar - MarmaBandha(;

Unification of two languages

Rendering the Marathi and the Urdu Ghazal in the Same Performance for last 40 years and above isa an experiment of his own kind.For fostering closeness between these two languages through their unification, he received: 

	 Setu Madhavrao Pagadi Award(; )by Urdu academy, Maharashtra State and 

	 Maulana Abdul Kalam Aazad Sanman (;) by Municipal Cooperation Pune;

Appreciate with thunderous applause on rendering the Ghazal in a fine blend of Marathi and Urdu.

Ghazal sagar prathisthan

Panchale has distinction of organising two state level workshop on Ghazal with the objective of polularating the marathi Ghazal and attract new talent in this field.These workshops helped to open new vistas towards Marathi Ghazal. Young talent got more attracted towards Marathi Ghazal with this workshops.

These workshops are mainly organised at Mumbai and Navi Mumbai.He has organised State Level Mushayras, Ghazal Singing festival, Ghazal programs for Academics and college etc.Moreover, publishing Ghazal Collection and releasing their audio Cassettes / CDs also occupying his mind and all this for propagating art of Ghazal. He has decided to Pledge his entire remaining life for this noble cause.

Panchale has published Ghazalche Chhand Shatra () Karwan (), Ghazalvishwa () Ghazal A book called Sparshankur () in Brail for blind Ghazal Lovers.and many other books.The Ghazal conferences organised by him did not confine to state level alone he has to his credit the holding of six Akhil Bhartya Marathi Ghazal Samllen ()

He has established GHAZAL SAGAR PRATHISTHAN for this noble cause.

Writing

He is Regular Contributor to Marathi News Paper - LokSatta, Lokprabha, Sakal, Belgao Tarun Bharat on propagating and promoting marathi Ghazal, besides being critical reviewer of books and programs on Ghazal and the News paper.

Donations

Donated Millions of Rupees by arranging various charity Ghazal Mehfil for libraries, Advasi Kalyan, Flood Affectd Areas, Educational Institutions, Lok Biradari Prakalpa of Dr.Prakash Amte at HemalKasa (Gadchiroli) and many others.


