
#Article: Bipasha Hayat
#Type: regular article

Bipasha Hayat (বিপাশা হায়াত) is a Bangladeshi actress. She has earned several awards, including UNESCO, Ananya, Meril-Prothom Alo and Anyadin-Impress Telefilm Awards. She had won a national award as the best actress for her performance in the film ‘Aguner Poroshmoni, based on a story of Bangladesh’s war of independence.

Early life

Bipasha Hayat is a graduate from the Institute of Fine Arts of University of Dhaka. She rarely exhibits her work. She has, in May 2009, donated some of her sketches for the charity painting exhibition for Acid victims, organized by Purple magazine in Dhaka.

Career

During the 90’s Hayat played many popular television dramas which established herself as one of the leading actresses of the country. She wrote her first TV play Shudhui tomake jani in 1997. She was also successful in theatre dramas but had to leave after her wedding. She gradually reduced working in the media as she became more involved with family life. But she still writes scripts for television drama.

She acted in two of the famous liberation war related movies Aguner Poroshmoni(her first film) and Joyjatra. The first of those which was directed by Humayun Ahmed, she portrayed the role of a young girl who was blocked in her house with her family inside the city of Dhaka. Ratri as her characters name, fell in love with a guerrilla freedom fighter (played by Asaduzzaman Noor) who lived in their house during the war for shelter. Her affection towards the fighter reflects the support and contribution of the civilians to the guerrilla fighters of the war. In Joyjatra, her character was much more different as she acted as a middle aged mother who lost her son as she tried to escape from an army attack. Both of her performances were hailed by the audiences and critics. Bipasha won National Film Award of Bangladesh as Best Actress in the film Aguner Poroshmoni.

Personal life

Bipasha is married to Toukir Ahmed, an actor and film director, on 23 July 1999. She is the daughter of actor and director Abul Hayat. Her sister Natasha Hayat is also an actress and Natasha's Husband Shamim Shahed Khan is also an actor. Bipasha and her sister invested on a boutique house in 2008. She also innugurate a "Bitop Gallery", a new fashion outlet, in Mohakhali area of Dhaka in 2013.

Television appearances

Filmography

Awards

National Film Awards

	 Best Actress - Aguner Poroshmoni (1994)

Meril Prothom Alo Awards

	 Best TV Actress (Popular Choice) - 1998, 1999, 2000


