
#Article: Bláthnaid Ní Chofaigh
#Type: regular article

Bláthnaid Ní Chofaigh (; born 12 November 1970) is an Irish TV presenter and Gaeilgeoir. She has presented Echo Island, The Afternoon Show and Charity ICA Bootcamp. She was a judge in The All Ireland Talent Show and participated in Celebrity Bainisteoir.

Career

Ní Chofaigh is a journalist, presenter and broadcaster on Irish television. Former presenter of Sin É, and former reporter for RTÉ News and Current Affairs, she covered stories as diverse as the Clinton visit; 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, 2003 Special Olympics World Summer Games; tall ships and female genital mutilation.

Ní Chofaigh has presented shows such as The Afternoon Show, Echo Island and The RTÉ People in Need Telethon on RTÉ Television. Her first role as a TV presenter was with the teenage weekly evening show Jo Maxi during the early 1990s.

Ní Chofaigh presents the Saint Patrick's Day Parade live every year in Dublin City.

She translated the song "The Best is Yet to Come" into the Irish language for the Metal Gear Solid Original Game Soundtrack.

Ní Chofaigh announced the votes for Ireland in the Eurovision Song Contest in 2001.

Ní Chofaigh co-presented The Afternoon Show from the first season in 2003 but abandoned it in 2009, complaining of health problems. The show was axed in 2010 a year after she left. She was a judge on The All Ireland Talent Show, and had great success on the final season with her act Daniel Furlong who took home the trophy. 

In 2010, Ní Chofaigh took part in the "reality" TV series Celebrity Bainisteoir, managing Nobber GFC, based in her home county of Meath. She took the team as far as the semi-final and then she lost. In 2011, Ní Chofaigh began hosting a new series called Charity ICA Bootcamp, which pitted celebrities taking on each other in challenges, with the winner Peter Clohessy receiving money to give to his chosen charity.

Ní Chofaigh was back on television with another afternoon lifestyle day-time talk show on RTÉ One in November 2012 alongside Norah Casey.

In January 2013, Ni Chofaigh made her acting debut in the TG4 series Crisis Eile, playing politician Maeve Kelly-Clarke.

Personal life

Born in Canada, she was raised in the Gaeltacht of Ráth Cairn, County Meath, Ireland. She is married with four children and currently lives in Dublin. Ní Chofaigh is a native Irish-speaker, and an avid Irish-language campaigner.

Ní Chofaigh is an ambassador for the charity Plan Ireland.


