
#Article: Bonnie Fuller
#Type: regular article

Bonnie Fuller (born Bonnie Hurowitz; September 8, 1956) is a Canadian media executive and the editor of HollywoodLife.com. Fuller has been responsible for several American magazine titles, including as vice president and editorial director of American Media (Star, Shape, Men's Fitness, Natural Health, and Fit Pregnancy).

Early life

Fuller was born in Toronto to a real-estate lawyer and an elementary school teacher. She graduated from Jarvis Collegiate Institute in 1974 and attended University of Toronto, where she earned a B.A. in 1977.

Career

In 1978, Fuller was a fashion reporter at the Toronto Star. Two years later, she became a sportswear editor for Women's Wear Daily. She landed her first Editor-in-Chief job at Candian national fashion magazine Flare for 3 years, from 1983 to 1986, and jumped to YM magazine as Editor-in-Chief. In 1994, she became Editor-in-Chief and launched the American version of Marie Claire magazine. In 1996, she was appointed Editor-in-Chief of Cosmopolitan magazine, succeeding Helen Gurley Brown. From 1998 to 2001, she was editor of Glamour magazine. Fuller worked as Editor-in-Chief of Us Weekly and redesigned the title, creating the modern celebrity newsweekly. She created such signature sections as “Stars Are Just Like Us,” “The Buzzometer,” and “Who Wore It Best.”

Beginning in July 2003, Bonnie served as Executive Vice President and Chief Editorial Director of American Media Inc., where she oversaw AMI’s 16 weekly, bi-weekly, and monthly magazines, including Star, Shape, Natural Health, Country Weekly and Men's Fitness. Under Bonnie’s leadership at AMI, Star relaunched from a tabloid to a glossy magazine. Bonnie stepped down from her position in May 2008, but remained the Editor-at-Large at Star and a consultant to AMI.

In July 2009 she was hired by Jay Penske to relaunch HollywoodLife.com, a celebrity news site. Bonnie Fuller is currently President and Editor-in-Chief of HollywoodLife.com and a PMC Senior Advisor. Bonnie also hosts a HollywoodLife weekly podcast available to download via iTunes.

She is a frequent contributor to a variety of media outlets including HuffingtonPost.com, Advertising Age, the Today show, Good Morning America, Access Hollywood, Good Day New York, Inside Edition, Nancy Grace, FOX Digital News, CNN New Day, WPIX and CTV News. On Tuesday mornings, she appears on Sirius XM Radio’s Cosmo Radio. She authored the bestselling book The Joys of Much Too Much: Go For The Big Life — The Great Career, The Perfect Guy, and Everything Else You’ve Ever Wanted.

Personal life

Fuller married Canadian architect Michael Fuller on June 26, 1983. They have four children.


