
#Article: Norman Reedus
#Type: regular article

Norman Mark Reedus (born January 6, 1969) is an American actor and model best known for his television role as Daryl Dixon on The Walking Dead, an AMC horror drama series (2010-present). He has also acted in numerous films, appeared in and created several videos, done video game voiceovers, and modeled for various fashion designers, most recognizably Prada in the 1990s.

Early life

Reedus was born in Hollywood, Florida, and is the eldest of two children born to Marianne (née Yarber) and Norman Reedus. He is of Italian (from his maternal grandfather), English, Northern Irish, and Scottish descent. He was raised in Los Angeles, California. Reedus also lived in Japan, Spain, and the United Kingdom. He worked at a Harley Davidson shop in Venice, California and contributed artwork to various shows as a painter, photographer, sculptor, and video artist. He got his first taste of acting in the play Maps for Drowners at the Tiffany Theater on Sunset Boulevard. He was first discovered at a party in Los Angeles, where someone asked him if he wanted to be in a play.

Career

Film and television

Reedus' first film was in the 1997 William Roth drama "Floating" where he played Van. He has also played roles in the films Dark Harbor, Mimic, Six Ways to Sunday, Deuces Wild, Blade II, Gossip, 8mm, American Gangster, Hero Wanted, and Moscow Chill. In 2005, he had a small role in the Christian Alvart film Antibodies as a German policeman. In 2008, he starred in the film Red Canyon. Reedus played Murphy MacManus in the 1999 movie The Boondock Saints. He also starred in the sequel 2009 The Boondock Saints II: All Saints Day. He guest starred on Charmed as Paige's (Rose McGowan) boyfriend, Nate.

The Walking Dead

In 2010, Reedus took on the role of Daryl Dixon in the AMC television series The Walking Dead, a horror drama about a group of friends and family members who fight to survive in a violent apocalyptic world populated with flesh-eating zombies and the few surviving humans, some of whom are even more diabolical and dangerous than the zombies themselves. The character was not originally in the comic book series of the same name, but was created specifically for Reedus after his audition for the character of Merle Dixon. The Walking Dead comic creator Robert Kirkman feels "absolutely blessed Reedus has honored the show with his presence, and the way he has come in and taken over that role and defined Daryl Dixon. A lot of Norman's portrayal of the character in the first season inspired all the writers to do what we did with him in the second season. We love writing him and end up doing cool stuff with him." The drama has evolved into the highest rated in cable history, smashing all previous records. Reedus was nominated for a 2012 Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of Dixon.

Reedus also starred in the film Hello Herman, which opened nationwide and on-demand on June 7, 2013.

In 2014, Reedus was set to the voice and motion capture for the main protagonist in the video game Silent Hills, which was to be directed by Hideo Kojima and Guillermo del Toro. He appeared in the demo entitled P.T. On April 27, 2015, Konami, Reedus and del Toro announced the cancellation of the project.

Modeling, music videos, and art

Reedus has modeled for Prada, Alessandro Dell'Acqua, Durban, Levi's, Lexus, and Morgenthal Fredrics. He has appeared in ten music videos: "Flat Top" by Goo Goo Dolls, "Cats in the Cradle" by Ugly Kid Joe, "Mean to Me" by Tonic, "Strange Currencies" by R.E.M., "Fake Plastic Trees" by Radiohead, "Violently Happy" by Björk, "Wicked As It Seems" by Keith Richards, "Sun Down" by Tricky (ft. Tirzah), "Gypsy Woman" by Hilary Duff, "Judas" by Lady Gaga (as Judas) ", "No Cities to Love" by Sleater-Kinney. Reedus also posed for a Cruelty Free Internationalad in support of ending cosmetic tests on animals. He is also a painter, sculptor, and photographer who currently shows his artwork in galleries in New York, Berlin, and Frankfurt. He released a book of photography on October 31, 2013 called "The Sun's Coming Up... Like A Big Bald Head," and in September 2014 announced a fan art compilation called "Thanks For All The Niceness".

Personal life

Reedus was in a long-term relationship with supermodel Helena Christensen from 1998 until 2003, although the two were never married, despite reports to the contrary. Together they have a son, Mingus Lucien Reedus (born October 13, 1999). The two have remained friends and share joint custody of their son.

In 2005, while in Berlin, Reedus was involved in a car accident. He required surgery for a titanium eye socket and four screws in his nose. He has several tattoos: his father's name on the left side of his chest, a devil on his upper right arm, his son's name on his right forearm, a star on his right hand, a tiny "X" above his left collar bone, two demons on his back, a heart on his right wrist, and a snake on his left leg.

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games


