
#Article: Caroline Celico
#Type: regular article

Caroline Celico Leite (née Lyra; born July 26, 1987 in São Paulo, Brazil) is a Brazilian socialite, singer and former Evangelical pastor at the Reborn in Christ Church, which she left in 2010. Celico married football player Kaká in 2005.

Personal life

Celico was born to Rosangela Lyra and Celso Celico in 1987. She has one younger brother, Enrico. Her parents got divorced when she was six-years old. Celico lived most of her childhood with her mother, who was the director of designers at Christian Dior S.A.. She has stated she was bullied in her childhood. Celico attended St. Paul's School in São Paulo.

In 2002, while still in school, she met Kaká; they were in relationship for two years during which Kaká was mostly away to play for A.C. Milan. While he was away, Celico joined his church and later became a pastor. During a vacation to Milan, Kaká proposed to her and the couple were married on December 23, 2005 in São Paulo. Together they have two children: son Luca Celico Leite (born June 10, 2008) and daughter Isabella Celico Leite (born April 23, 2011). Celico and Kaká resided in Madrid with their children while he played at Real Madrid. In 2013, they moved back to Milan, Italy. The couple announced their divorce in 2015.

Celico is close friends with Brazilian singer Claudia Leitte, who was featured in one of the songs of Celico's album, "Mesma Luz", written by Celico about their friendship.

Professional life

During her school years, Celico occasionally worked as a model. After moving to Milan with Kaká, she started studying fashion at the Istituto Marangoni. At age 19, she founded a company called Party Design Milano, but left it due to her pregnancy.

Celico served as a pastor at Reborn in Christ Church megachurch in Brazil but left in 2010, after its founders became embroiled in a financial scandal. Later in 2010, she started to work on her album, which was only put online for free on limited release. The album was downloaded 1,3 million times. In 2011, after signing a deal with Universal Music Group, Celico decided to release it all around Brazil and also made a Deluxe DVD version of album.

Celico has created a non-profit organization called Horizontal Love, which provides supplies of food, hygiene, construction and education to Brazilian NGOs.

Discography

	 Carol Celico (2010)


