
#Article: Shar Jackson
#Type: regular article

Sharisse "Shar" Jackson (born August 31, 1976) is an American actress and singer, best known for playing Niecy Jackson on the UPN show Moesha. She currently lives in Los Angeles, California.

Early life

Jackson was born in Boston, Massachusetts. Her mother is of African American and Native American descent, and her father is of Puerto Rican and Mexican descent.

Career

Jackson played the title character's best friend, Niecy Jackson on the television show Moesha. She has also appeared in The Bernie Mac Show. She co-starred in the Nickelodeon movie Good Burger with Kel Mitchell and Kenan Thompson. Jackson was also featured on the ABC reality series The Ex-Wives Club with Marla Maples and Angie Everhart. The show aimed to aid men and women who have recently gone through separation or divorce. In 2009, Jackson appeared in the film I Do... I Did!. She also appeared in the dance film Steppin: The Movie

Jackson was a singer in the pop group Mpulz and was included on The Princess Diaries soundtrack. The group released one album before disbanding.

She won first place on the MTV reality show Celebrity Rap Superstar on October 18, 2007, beating runner-up Contro. She also appeared on the seventh season of Celebrity Fit Club: Boot Camp, which premiered in February 2010.

Personal life

Jackson was engaged to Kevin Federline, with whom she has daughter Kori Madison Federline (born July 31, 2002) and son Kaleb Michael Jackson Federline (born July 20, 2004). The couple separated shortly before Kaleb's birth. After the separation, Federline began a relationship with pop singer Britney Spears. Jackson later commented that Federline's relationship with Spears "wasn't like just breaking up a relationship. It was like breaking up a family", but sustained an amicable relationship with Federline, complimenting his parenting. Federline married Spears, but they divorced after two years. She has two older children, son Donnie (born October 1993) and daughter Cassie (born June 1995), by her high school boyfriend.

Filmography

	Film credits

Love & Basketball as Felicia

Steppin: The Movie as Uwamma Layne

 Good Burger as Monique

 I Do...I Did as Candy

Roc (1991), 

	 Television credits


