
#Article: Guy Kawasaki
#Type: regular article

Guy Kawasaki (born August 30, 1954) is a Silicon Valley marketing executive. He was one of the Apple employees originally responsible for marketing the Macintosh in 1984. He popularized the word evangelist in marketing the Macintosh and the concepts of evangelism marketing and technology evangelism.

In March 2015, Kawasaki joined the Board of Trustees of the Wikimedia Foundation, the non-profit operating entity of Wikipedia.

Kawasaki has also written a number of books including The Art of Social Media (2014) and Database 101 (1991).

Early life

Guy Kawasaki was born in Honolulu, Hawaii, where he attended ʻIolani School. He credits his writing career to Harold Keables, his Advanced Placement English teacher, who taught him that "the key to writing is editing."

Kawasaki graduated from Stanford University In 1976 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in psychology. He then attended law school at UC Davis, but quit after about a week of classes when he realized that he hated law school. In 1977, he enrolled in the UCLA Anderson School of Management, where he earned a MBA degree. While there, Kawasaki also worked at a jewelry company, Nova manufacturer. Kawasaki observed, "The jewelry business is a very, very tough business, tougher than the computer business... I learned a very valuable lesson: how to sell."

Career

In 1983, Kawasaki got a job at Apple through his Stanford roommate, Mike Boich. He was Apple's chief evangelist for four years. In a 2006 podcast interview on the online site Venture Voice, Kawasaki said, "What got me to leave is basically I started listening to my own hype, and I wanted to start a software company and really make big bucks." In 1987 he was hired to lead ACIUS, the U.S. subsidiary of France-based ACI, which published an Apple database software system called 4th Dimension.

Kawasaki left ACIUS in 1989 to further his writing and speaking career. In the early 1990s he wrote columns that were featured in Forbes and MacUser. He also founded another company, Fog City Software, which created Emailer, an email client that sold to Claris.

He returned to Apple as an Apple Fellow in 1995. In 1998, he was a co-founder of Garage Technology Ventures, a venture capital firm that has made investments in Pandora Radio, Tripwire, The Motley Fool and D.light Design. In 2007, he founded Truemors, a free-flow rumor mill, that sold to NowPublic. He is also a founder at Alltop, an online magazine rack.

In March 2013 Kawasaki announced he would be joining Google as an advisor to Motorola. His role was to create a Google+ mobile device community.

In April 2014, Kawasaki became the chief evangelist of Canva. It is a free graphic-design website, for non-designers as well as professionals, founded in 2012.

On March 24, 2015, the Wikimedia Foundation announced Kawasaki had joined the foundation's board of trustees.


