
#Article: Rebecca Miller
#Type: regular article

Rebecca Augusta Miller, Lady Day-Lewis (born September 15, 1962) is an American film director, screenwriter, author and actress, most known for her films Personal Velocity: Three Portraits, The Ballad of Jack and Rose, Angela and The Private Lives of Pippa Lee, all of which she wrote and directed. She is the daughter of Magnum photographer Inge Morath and Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright Arthur Miller. Her husband is three-time Academy Award-winning actor Sir Daniel Day-Lewis.

Early life

Miller was born in Roxbury, Connecticut, and is the daughter of playwright Arthur Miller and Austrian-born photographer Inge Morath. She has a brother, Daniel, who was born in 1966 with Down Syndrome and was placed in an institution shortly after his birth. Her father was Jewish and her mother was Protestant. For a time during her childhood, Miller practiced Catholicism on her own accord; she has said that she "stopped thinking of herself as a Christian somewhere at the end of college". She was educated at Choate Rosemary Hall and Yale University, where she studied art. She initially pursued an acting career, landing parts in the television movie The Murder of Mary Phagan and the feature films Regarding Henry (1991) and Consenting Adults (1992).

Career

In 1995, she went behind the camera, writing and directing her first film, Angela. The film premiered at the Sundance Film Festival and was critically well-received, but did not garner significant attention or audiences.

In 2001, Miller published a collection of short stories called Personal Velocity. The following year she adapted it into a film which she also directed. Personal Velocity: Three Portraits received good reviews and won a number of awards, including the Grand Jury Prize at the Sundance Film Festival, the John Cassavetes Award at the Independent Spirit Awards as well as a Special Recognition from the National Board of Review for Excellence in filmmaking.

In 2002 she published her second novel The Private Lives of Pippa Lee, which she adapted into a film in 2009 starring Robin Wright, Alan Arkin, Keanu Reeves, Winona Ryder and Julianne Moore. In 2003 she wrote and illustrated Woman Who....

In 2005 she wrote and directed The Ballad of Jack and Rose, starring Daniel Day-Lewis, Camilla Belle and Catherine Keener. It received mixed reviews from critics upon its release.

Her latest novel is titled Jacob's Folly and it was released in March 2013.

Her next film is an original screenplay called Maggie's Plan. The ensemble cast includes Greta Gerwig, Julianne Moore, Ethan Hawke, Bill Hader and Maya Rudolph. It is set to premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival as part of the Special Presentations.

Personal life

Miller first met her future husband, actor Daniel Day-Lewis, on set during the production of the film adaption of the elder Miller's play The Crucible. They were married on November 13, 1996 and have two sons, Ronan (born June 14, 1998) and Cashel (born May 2002). Since her husband received his knighthood Miller is entitled to the title of Lady Day-Lewis.

Filmography

Director/Screenwriter

	Angela (1995)

	Personal Velocity: Three Portraits (2002)

	The Ballad of Jack and Rose (2005)

	The Private Lives of Pippa Lee (2009)

	Maggie's Plan (2015)

Screenwriter

	Proof (2005)

Actress

	The Murder of Mary Phagan (1988, TV)... Lucille Frank

	 (1989)... Anneliese

	Regarding Henry (1991)... Linda

	Wind (1992)... Abigail Weld

	Consenting Adults (1992)... Kay Otis

	The Pickle (1993)... Carrie

	The American Clock (1993, TV)... Edie

	Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle (1994)... Neysa McMein

	Love Affair (1994)... Receptionist


