
#Article: Charlie Hernández
#Type: regular article

Carlos M. "Charlie" Hernández López (born February 19, 1965) is a Puerto Rican politician affiliated with the Popular Democratic Party (PPD). He has been a member of the Puerto Rico House of Representatives since 2001 representing District 19. In 2012, he was reelected, this time as a Representative At-large.

Early years and studies

Charlie Hernández was born February 19, 1965 in Mayagüez. During his childhood, he was part of the Boy Scouts of America.

After graduating high school, Hernández was admitted to the University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez. During his time there, he was part of the Student Council and the Academic Senate. He was also founder and director of the student newspaper Campus Colegial. Because of his academic excellence, he received the award for the Most Distinguished Student of the Department of Social Sciences in 1986. He was also part of the Honor roll during the three years he studied.

After participating in the summer internship of the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs of the Princeton University in New Jersey, Hernández received a scholarship to continue postgraduate studies in Public Administration sponsored by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Woodrow Wilson Foundation, and then the Ford Foundation. 

After graduating with honors from the Faculty of Law of the University of Puerto Rico, he continued his studies, obtaining a Master's degree in Public Administration from the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs of the University of Texas at Austin. During those years, he realized investigations about the health service and political parties in Mexico, which were eventually published. He also completed a thesis about the Territories of Micronesia and the territorial politics of the United States.

Professional career

After returning to Puerto Rico, Hernández practiced law specializing in civil and constitutional rights.

Political career

Hernández was first elected to the House of Representatives of Puerto Rico at the 2000 general election, representing District 19. During his first term, he presided the Commissions of Law and the Civil Code Revision. He was also a member of the Commissions of Federal and International Affairs, Government, Capital Development, and others.

In 2004, Hernández was reelected for a second term. During that time, he served as Minority Speaker for his party in several commissions, as well as being member of others. After being reelected for a third term at the 2008 general election, Hernández again served as Minority Speaker of his party in several commissions.

In 2012, Hernández decided to run as a Representative At-large at the 2012 general election. He was elected, being the third candidate with most votes from his party. After that, Hernández was appointed as Majority Speaker for his party.

Personal life

Hernández was married to journalist Damaris Suárez for approximately ten years. They have a son together. On December 2012, they both announced they were getting divorced.


