
#Article: Phil Prendergast
#Type: regular article

Phil Prendergast (née Foley; born 20 September 1959) is an Irish former Labour Party politician. She was an S&D Member of the European Parliament (MEP) for the South constituency from 2011 to 2014. She was a member of Seanad Éireann from 2007 to 2011.

Early and private life

Phil Foley was born in County Kilkenny. She was a midwife at South Tipperary General Hospital for more than 20 years, having trained in Waterford Regional Hospital. She is married to Ray Prendergast, a psychiatric nurse, and has two children.

She is a former local branch officer with the Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation. She served on its Executive Board in 1994.

Political career

Local

She was elected to Clonmel Borough Council and South Tipperary County Council from 1999 to 2007, where she was elected as originally as a member of the Workers and Unemployed Action Group (WUAG).

National

She first contested a general election in June 2001 when she contested the by-election on behalf of the WUAG, following the death of Theresa Ahearn. She polled 7,898 first preference votes. She subsequently left the WUAG in June 2005 to join the Labour Party and ran in the 2007 Dáil election. She was not elected at the 2007 general election in the Tipperary South constituency, but was subsequently elected to the Seanad on the Labour Panel.

She caused some controversy within the local Labour Party branch when she tried to nominate a family member to replace her on the council.

She was previously Labour Party spokesperson on the Older Person and Seanad spokesperson on Health; Art and Sports; and Social and Family Affairs. She unsuccessfully contested the 2011 general election for Tipperary South, receiving almost 11.0% of the first preference votes.

European

In April 2011, she was selected as the replacement for MEP Alan Kelly who was elected to Dáil Éireann at the 2011 election for Tipperary North. She sits on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection and on the Agriculture and Rural Development Committee. Since becoming a Member of the European Parliament she has spoken 127 times in plenary session and has amended 32 reports.

She was involved in a controversy with the Labour Party leadership when she became the first member of the parliamentary party to call for the resignation of Health Minister James Reilly following the announcement of the location of primary care health centres in the minister's own constituency.

She lost her seat at the 2014 European Parliament election.


