
#Article: Chris Henchy
#Type: regular article

Christopher Thomas "Chris" Henchy  (born March 23, 1964) is an American screenwriter and producer.

Early life

Henchy was born in New York City, to Patricia Henchy. He was raised in Augusta, Georgia and attended Saint Mary on the Hill Catholic School. He graduated from Friendswood High School in 1982, where he was active in journalism and was a member of the yearbook staff. He attended the University of New Mexico, where he received a B.S. degree in finance and was a member of the Sigma Alpha Epsilon chapter.

Career

After graduation, Henchy moved to New York and worked on Wall Street. He later left his job and decided to work in comedy. He was hired by MTV and later became a writer for The Larry Sanders Show.

Henchy went on to write for Campus Cops in 1996. After writing for a few television specials and some guest-writing stints on series, Henchy created and produced television series Battery Park in 2000, which starred Elizabeth Perkins. The show was cancelled after four episodes.

Henchy was a writer and producer for television sitcoms Spin City and Life With Bonnie. He created the sitcom I'm with Her with Marco Pennette, which was loosely based on Henchy's relationship with wife Brooke Shields. The show was cancelled by ABC after one season. Henchy later became the co-executive producer of Entourage and a producer on HBO's Eastbound & Down. He, along with Will Ferrell and Adam McKay, created the website Funny or Die. Henchy produced The Goods: Live Hard, Sell Hard. He is credited as a writer of the 2009 film Land of the Lost, The Other Guys and The Campaign which he also co-produced.

Personal life

Henchy met actress, author and model Brooke Shields in 1999 on the Warner Bros lot. They became engaged in July 2000 while on vacation in Mexico and married on April 4, 2001. They have two daughters, Rowan Frances (born May 15, 2003, in New York City), and Grier Hammond (born April 18, 2006, in Los Angeles) and reside in Manhattan, New York City.


