
#Article: Chris Back
#Type: regular article

Christopher John "Chris" Back (born 11 February 1950) was voted by a joint sitting of the Western Australian Parliament to replace the Hon.Chris Ellison, who had resigned in January.He has been a Liberal Party member of the Australian Senate since 2009. He commenced his new term in the Australian Senate on 1 July 2011.

Back was born in Perth. He is a qualified veterinarian, after graduating with a degree in veterinary science from the University of Queensland. He has extensive experience as a veterinarian having worked predominantly in large animal practice in Western Australia, Victoria and the United States.

He also lectured at Muresk Institute where he introduced the first equine management course in Australasia.

He then became chief executive officer of Rottnest Island where he focussed on developing the island's failing infrastructure, increasing tourism and driving an active environmental agenda which has now seen the revegetation of more than one million native plants on the island.

In 1995, Back was appointed chief executive officer of the Bush Fires Board of Western Australia which is now part of the Fire and Emergency Services Authority of Western Australia. In that role, Back introduced water bombing aircraft and updated volunteer equipment. He received the Prime Minister's Gold Award for technological achievement recognising the work undertaken in using satellites to track wildfires in remote locations.

Back then moved to Tasmania and purchased the retail and distribution business of a major oil company. Following this, he assumed a business executive role in SE Asia, India and the Middle East servicing oil majors and military clients and subsequently assisting in the establishment of a multi-national oil and gas services company.

Back has recently been appointed as Deputy Party Whip for the Coalition Government in the Australian Senate. 

Back's vision guiding his role as a senator is:Towards an Australian community in which every member is safe, feels valued and contributes to a sustainable future.

While debating a bill to remove Medicare funding for abortions carried out purely on the basis of gender selection Dr Back told the Australian Senate that foetuses miscarry because they understand they may not survive in post-foetal life. He also warned senators they may be offended by his views that 'maleness is actually suppressed femaleness' due to the stages of embryonic development


