
#Article: Chut Wutty
#Type: regular article

Chut Wutty (ឈុត វុទ្ធី; 1972-2012) was Founder and Director of the Natural Resource Protection Group (NRPG). He was a Cambodian environmental activist best known as the country’s most vocal critic of the military's alleged role in illegal logging conducted by companies granted land concessions in protected forests and related government corruption.

Life

Wutty was born in Svay Meas village, Vihear Sour commune, Kchlach Kandal district, Kandal province, Cambodia. Chut Wutty obtained a master's degree in Military Studies from Russia in 1992. After his graduation, Wutty was employed as an Electrician's Helper by the small Canadian Contingent of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) with 92 (CDN) Transportation Company, Delta Platoon, Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (EME) Det at Camp Canada, Pochentong Airport, now known as Phnom Penh International Airport, until 1993. Later he worked with the Cambodian Mine Action Centre (CMAC) and as a military trainer at the Ministry of National Defence. In 2003, he was a Deputy Director of Global Witness in Cambodia, who acted as a watchdog on the illegal logging all over the country. After the expulsion of Global Witness by the Cambodian government, Wutty founded the organization Natural Resource Protection Group (NRPG), with financial support from Germany. The organization has its focus on the protection of the forest and natural resources in Cambodia.

Death

On 26 April 2012, Wutty was shot dead at Veal Bei Point in Mondol Seima, while escorting two female journalists from The Cambodia Daily near a protected forest in Koh Kong Province, where he had repeatedly attempted to expose illegal logging rackets that include military officials. He was 48 years old. Local rights groups ADHOC and LICADHO immediately dispatched investigators, and LICADHO's Koh Kong provincial coordinator, In Kong Chet, said that after talking to ballistics police, he had established that Chut Wutty was shot as he tried to drive away from the military police. Wutty is survived by his wife, two daughters, and a son. This was supported by other rights groups.

In September 2014, he was honored by U.S. President Barack Obama, during his speech at the Clinton Global Initiative, for his activism while he was alive.


