
#Article: Cristiana Oliveira
#Type: regular article

Cristiana Barbosa da Silva de Oliveira (born December 15, 1963 in Rio de Janeiro) is a Brazilian actress.

Biography

Daughter of Oscar de Oliveira and Eugênia Barbosa da Silva de Oliveira, is the youngest of nine children (two men and seven women). Born and raised in a house in Ipanema, to help at home began to work with 10 years of age at a flower shop near her residence. Since little is nicknamed Krika.

She recorded a commercial directed by Walter Salles, and with this trade, was called to the defunct TV Manchete, by Jayme Monjardim, to test for a program of music clips, Shock. Just doing the test, not for the program, but for the telenovela Kananga do Japão to Dora the leading role. With the withdrawal of actress Bia Seidl, who was Hannah, a Jewess, Cristiana was put in its place . With this novel won by unanimous actress revelation by APCA.

In 1989 she began recording the Pantanal for Rede Manchete, in the role of Juma, which initially would be for the actress Glória Pires. But Cristiana offered to do it, since she had fallen in love with the character when reading the synopsis. The novel was a big hit, knocking the audience of TV Globo and becoming a landmark in Brazilian soap operas. Her work won awards in Brazil and abroad. It was one of her most recognized and idolized roles..

In 1992 she was hired by TV Globo to live the protagonist of the miniseries Agosto, a role that came to be played by Vera Fischer, as was decided by the leadership of the station that Christina would be the protagonist, along with Tarcísio Meira, the telenovela De Corpo e Alma. In February of that year, she posed nude for the Brazilian edition of Playboy magazine, one of the few occasions where the trial was presented in a special insert.

In 1994, she took part in the miniseries Memorial de Maria Moura, and then starred in the soap opera Quatro por Quatro, alongside actresses, Letícia Spiller, Elizabeth Savalla and Betty Lago. For the first time in her television career, the actress would make a paper comical. After the end of the novel, lived in NY in order to improve the English.

In 2001 participated in the first episode of the soap opera Porto dos Milagres. The following year, was the second phase of the novel O Clone, in which disguised as the villain Alicinha.

In 2011 played a cameo praised by critics and the public Insensato Coração, the role of lesbian and convict drug dealer, called Araci Laranjeira. He had to gain weight 15 pounds to play that role and suffered prejudice from the media and public.

Filmography

Television

Film


