
#Article: Cindy Pan
#Type: regular article

Cindy Han-Liang Pan is an Australian doctor and television personality, who specialises in sexual health and women's health.

Early life and education

Pan was born in Sydney, and was raised on a CSIRO (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation) research station in Badgerys Creek where her father was a scientist. She attended Abbotsleigh School for Girls on the upper North Shore of Sydney, before receiving her medical degree at the University of Sydney.

Career

Prior to becoming famous as a celebrity doctor, Pan was a general practitioner. She is also a Fellow of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners.

She has appeared in advertisements, on the Network Ten television series The Panel, and was a regular on the ABC series The Glass House. Pan is also well known for her compendium on sex, drugs and relationships, Pandora's Box: Lifting the Lid on Life's Little Nasties". Cindy has appeared on various television programs including: The Pam Ann Show, Big Brother Uncut, Beauty and the Beast, The Super Debates, and the travel documentary The Ties That Bind, in which she and her mother travelled to China in search of their roots.

In recent years, she has continued to present herself as a strong role model and spokeswoman for women's health, appearing as the face of PhysiCAL Milk in the long-running Australian ad-campaign. She was also a guest on Test Australia: National IQ Test 2002, and the 10 October 2008 episode of Hole in the Wall (Channel 9). She writes regularly on relationships, health and sex in Good Medicine and Girlfriend magazines and was previously 'Sex and Relationships' columnist for the Sydney newspaper, The Sun-Herald. She was the Ambassador for Chinese New Year for the City of Sydney in 2000, 2001, 2002 and again in 2007. In May 2011, Sydney-based author, Amanda Cole, issued Who Needs Prince Charming?, a self-realisation book for women, which collated contributions from 35 Australian women including Pan, Bianca Dye, Camilla Franks, Kathryn Eisman, Bessie Bardot, Molly Contogeorge and Tania Zaetta.

Personal life

Pan is a mother to two boys.


