
#Article: Claire Shipman
#Type: regular article

Claire Shipman is an American television journalist, currently the senior national correspondent for the ABC program, Good Morning America. She also blogs at the website True/Slant. She is married to Jay Carney, President Barack Obama's former White House Press Secretary.

Life and career

Shipman, born October 4, 1962 in Washington, D.C., is the daughter of the late Christie Armstrong and Morgan Shipman, Professor of Law at The Ohio State University, Moritz College of Law. She graduated from Worthington High School in Worthington, Ohio in 1980. In 2006, she was recognized by Worthington Schools as a Distinguished Alumna during Convocation. She is a 1986 graduate of Columbia College of Columbia University and also holds a master's degree from Columbia's School of International and Public Affairs. She is divorced from former CNN Moscow bureau chief Steve Hurst. She and her second husband, Jay Carney, have a son and daughter. Carney was the White House press secretary from January 27, 2011 to June 20, 2014. She claims that her husband gave her no hint of the Bin Laden attack in Pakistan.

Shipman's broadcast career started with a decade-long stint at CNN. From 1997 to May 2001 Shipman served as White House Correspondent for NBC News and appeared on NBC Nightly News and The Today Show. She joined ABC News in May 2001, and frequently contributes to other ABC News programs, such as World News Tonight and Nightline. She is a substitute anchor on both Good Morning America and World News Tonight, as well as a regular participant in the "roundtable" segment of ABC News' This Week with Christiane Amanpour. 

On June 2, 2009, Harper Collins published Womenomics, a book written by Shipman and BBC World News America correspondent Katty Kay exploring the redefinition of success for working women based on recent trends of the value of women to the business world.

Recognition

Shipman received a Peabody Award for her work covering the 1991 Soviet coup and the subsequent dissolution of the Soviet Union.


