
#Article: Debi Gliori
#Type: regular article

Debi Gliori (born 1959) is a Scottish writer and illustrator of children's books. 

Life and career

Gliori was born in Glasgow and grew up there as an only child. She started writing children's books in 1976 and attended art school in Edinburgh from 1979 to 1984. She then received an Andrew Grant travelling scholarship award to go to Milan, and worked as a freelance from 1984. In 1989, independent children's book publisher Walker Books signed her, and she acquired an agent three years later.

Gliori is the creator of many children's books including the Mr Bear picture book series. She wrote the black comedy Pure Dead series for older children, with Pure Dead Magic being her first novel.

Gliori lives in East Lothian, just outside Edinburgh, Scotland with her five children.

Awards

Mr. Bear won the Red House Children's Book Award for picture books in 1997. Mr. Bear to the Rescue was shortlisted for the Kate Greenaway Medal in 1997; Mr. Bear Babysits, Mr. Bear's Picnic and Mr. Bear to the Rescue were all awarded a Gold award in the Petit Filous Best Toy Awards, and Mr. Bear Says Goodnight was chosen for the Booktrust's Bookstart project. Where, Oh Where, is Baby Bear? was shortlisted for the Sainsbury's Baby Book Award in 2001. Always and Forever, written by Alan Durant and illustrated by Debi Gliori, was shortlisted for the Kate Greenaway Medal in 2003. Her work has also been shortlisted for the Scottish Arts Council Award (for Pure Dead Wicked in 2003), and for the Royal Mail Award (for Stormy Weather in 2010).

Reception

What's the Time, Mr Wolf?Reviewing the same work in We Love This Book, Caroline Downie writes, "Gliori's illustrations are a delight, full of detail and surprises", with "so many things on each page to discover, share, count and laugh at."

On the Booktrust website, What's the Time Mr Wolf? is described as "a delightful story, inspired by traditional fairy tales as well as the familiar playground game, 'What's the Time Mr Wolf?'" The reviewer found the book to contain much "lively detail" and "beautiful illustrations" and suggested that it would make a perfect and soothing bedtime story.

At SchoolZone, schools librarian Joy Court found What's the Time Mr Wolf? to be "an enchantingly original story" and "a delight to read aloud". She writes that the book is "perfect for practising telling the time" and for the British educational Key Stage 1.

At Parents in Touch, the reviewer writes that the book is humorous, "filled with much loved characters" and contains "catchy text" which is "a joy to read aloud". The reviewer adds that the illustrations are "packed with thoughtful detail" and an "utter delight".

Other reviews

	 

Media coverage

	 

	 The programme was broadcast at 6:30pm, UK time, on 7 November 2012. The piece runs from 24:33 onwards and was available online until 6:59pm on Thursday 8 November 2012.

	 The BBC Scotland piece is also available in this Gaelic language version. 

The Tobermory cat

Two small cats known as The Distillery Cats appear on The Tobermory Distillery Sign. In 2012, the origin of the idea of Gliori's book, 'The Tobermory Cat' came under fierce online dispute. There have been a number of creative works using the name "Tobermory", most notably an illustrated children's book, The Tobermory Cat by Debi Gliori and the earlier Facebook page and book entitled Tobermory Cat by the Isle of Mull artist Angus Stewart.

Articles by the author

Articles about the author

Videos


