
#Article: Natalie Babbitt
#Type: regular article

Natalie Babbitt (born July 28, 1932) is an American writer and illustrator of children's books. For her contributions as a children's writer she was U.S. nominee for the biennial international Hans Christian Andersen Award in 1982.

Biography

Born Natalie Zane Moore in Dayton, Ohio, Babbitt studied at Laurel School in Cleveland and Smith College in Northampton, Massachusetts. She is married to Samuel Fisher Babbitt and the couple have three children, born 1956 to 1960. They lived in his home town of New Haven, Connecticut, when he earned the PhD in 1965 and became the president of Kirkland College in Clinton, New York (1965 to 1978).

The Babbitts collaborated to create The Forty-ninth Magician, a picture book that he wrote and she illustrated, published by Pantheon Books in 1966. Samuel became too busy to participate but editor Michael di Capua at Farrar, Straus and Giroux encouraged Natalie to continue producing children's books. After writing and illustrating two short books in verse, she turned to children's novels, and her second effort in that vein, Knee-Knock Rise, was awarded a Newbery Honor in 1971.

Tuck Everlasting, published in 1975, was named an ALA Notable book and continues to be popular with teachers. It was ranked number 16 among the "Top 100 Chapter Books" of all time in a 2012 survey published by School Library Journal. Two of her books have been adapted as movies: Tuck Everlasting twice, in 1981 and 2002, and The Eyes of the Amaryllis in 1982. At the present time, "Tuck Everlasting" is being prepared as a Broadway musical, opening in Atlanta on February 4, 2015. In addition to her own writing, Babbitt has also illustrated a number of books by Valerie Worth.

Reception

In 1977, The New York Times called Babbitt "Indisputably one of our most gifted and ambitious writers for children".

In 1982, another Times reviewer, George Woods, enjoyed Babbitt's Herbert Rowbarge. "Mrs. Babbitt creates a plausible world and peoples it with believable humans, but the most satisfaction comes from the pleasure of her company as she effortlessly takes the reader in velvet-gloved hand to point out life's coincidences and near misses."

In 2002, Melanie Rehak, also writing in the Times, described Babbitt's Tuck Everlasting as a "slim, ruminative" novel, and stated that "From the moment it appeared, it has been fiercely loved by children and their parents for its honest, intelligent grappling with aging and death."

In 2012, Babbitt was awarded the inaugural E.B. White Award for achievement in children's literature by the American Academy of Arts and Letters.


