
#Article: Troy Donahue
#Type: regular article

Troy Donahue (January 27, 1936 - September 2, 2001) was an American film and television actor and singer. Donahue became a popular male sex symbol of the 1950s and 1960s.

Early years

Born Merle Johnson, Jr. in New York City, Donahue was the son of a retired stage actress and the manager of the motion picture department of General Motors. Donahue later recalled in a 1959 interview:

Acting is all I ever wanted. Ever since I can remember I've studied and read plays. My mother would help me but my parents didn't want me to become an actor. They preferred something more stable—doctor, lawyer, Indian chief, anything.

"I can remember always being exposed to Broadway and theater people," he added in 1984. "I can remember sitting with Gertrude Lawrence while she read her reviews in The King and I."

To please his parents he attended a New York military academy. He was going to attend West Point but suffered a damaged knee at a track meet. He volunteered for the army but they rejected him.

When he was 18 he moved to New York and got a job as a messenger in a film company founded by his father (who had died when he was 14). He was fired, he says, because he was too young to join the union.

He attended Columbia University and studied journalism, and acted in summer stock at Bucks County. He trained briefly with Ezra Stone then moved to Hollywood.

One evening, producer William Asher and director James Sheldon spotted him in a diner at Malibu and arranged for a screen test with Columbia Pictures. It was unsuccessful, and Donahue was in a car accident in which he drove off a road and plunged 40 feet down a canyon.

Actress Fran Bennett introduced him to Henry Willson, who represented Rock Hudson, among others. Willson signed him and it was he who changed Johnson's name to Troy Donahue. "At first they had Paris, the lover of Helen of Troy, in mind," Donahue says. "But I guess they thought they couldn't name me Paris Donahue because there was already a Paris, France, and Paris, Illinois." He later added, "it took me five minutes to get used to" his new name.

Career

Donahue signed with Universal Studios in 1956. He established himself with uncredited roles in The Monolith Monsters and Man Afraid in 1957, leading to larger parts in several films and on TV shows. Donahue starred in Monster on the Campus, Live Fast, Die Young, and The Tarnished Angels, all in 1958. He won praise in a small role in Imitation of Life.

Stardom

The big break of Donahue's career came when he was cast opposite Sandra Dee in A Summer Place, made by Warner Bros in 1959. This role made him a major star, especially among teenage audiences. In 1960 he was named by Film Daily as one of the five "finds" of the year.

He signed a contract with Warner Bros. and played several successive leading roles in films such as Parrish, Susan Slade, Rome Adventure, Palm Springs Weekend, and A Distant Trumpet. 

He was reportedly going to be cast in Splendor in the Grass but missed out to Warren Beatty.

"I guess because I was blond, blue-eyed and tanned, people associated me with all those beach movies that were around then, even though I never did one," he later said. "I was always the goody-goody, the guy who did what he was supposed to."

In 1962 he claimed he received 5,000-7,500 fan letters a week. The following year, exhibitors voted him the 20th most popular star in the USA. He was also very popular in Japan.

From 1960 to 1962, Donahue starred with Van Williams, Lee Patterson, Diane McBain, and Margarita Sierra in the ABC/WB series, Surfside 6, set in Miami Beach, Florida.

After Surfside 6 was canceled, Donahue joined the cast of another ABC/WB detective series, Hawaiian Eye for its last season from 1962 to 1963 in the role of hotel director Philip Barton, with Robert Conrad and Connie Stevens in the series lead.

Donahue also had a brief tenure as a recording artist at the height of his fame in the early 1960s, releasing a handful of singles for Warner Bros. records, including "Live Young" and "Somebody Loves Me". However, none of his recordings entered the Billboard Hot 100 list.

Decline

In 1965, Donahue was cast as a psychopathic killer opposite Joey Heatherton in My Blood Runs Cold. While Donahue was happy to break type and play a different type of role, it was not well received by the public. His contract with Warner Bros. ended shortly thereafter—although it ran until early 1968, Donahue asked to be released from it in January 1966. Donahue later claimed:

Jack Warner called every studio I used to work for and used his muscle to keep me busted. I was backballed and everyone in the business knew it. Please print that. I made one film in Europe playing a Victorian astronaut but no one ever saw it. Then by the time I could get work again it was too late because my type was already out of fashion.

He later reflected on this period, "They pumped me til the well went dry. My image came out of Warner Bros and it was one that was on its way out. I think I'm a little deeper than the roles I was given to play."

In 1967 he said Parrish had been the most satisfactory of his movies. "I had the best script and the best opportunity as an actor. Not too many of those came my way. But I did get great exposure at Warners. Now I'm free to call my own shots. I've made more money in two years on my own than the whole time I was under contract."

That year Donahue walked out of a contract to appear in a play Poor Richard at the Pheasant Run Playhouse. He was sued for $200,000.

The following year Donahue signed a long term contract with Universal Studios for films and TV. This lasted a year and saw him guest on a number of shows. He declared bankruptcy in 1968 and eventually lost his home. "I was living like a movie star but wasn't being paid like one," he says. "I lived way over my head and got into great trouble and lost everything. I went from a beautiful home, garden, swimming pool to living in shabby apartments."

Donahue later admitted that he began abusing drugs and alcohol at the peak of his career and increased usage after his career began to wane:I was loaded all the time... I'd wake up about 6:30 in the morning, take three aspirins mixed with codeine, slug down half a pint of vodka and then do four lines of cocaine. That was just so I could get the front door open to peek out and see if I could face the day... I would lie, steal and cheat, all those wonderful things that drunks do. I was crafty. Nobody knew how much I drank then. If a bottle was out on the counter, I'd take a swig when I passed it and quickly put it back."I spent a lot of time judging beauty contests and opening banks," Donahue said of this period. He also wrote TV screenplays under a pseudonym.

Donahue was struggling to make his way in a changing Hollywood. As he said later, "If you're the boy next door and you're supposed to be squeaky clean, all you had to do was let your sideburns grow and suddenly you were a hippy." Donahue says when he met casting directors they would ask "Why don't you comb your hair? How come you have grown a moustache? What are you doing with a beard?" He also thinks his career was hurt by the fact he was an anti-Vietnam War Democrat while "everybody assumed I was a Republican".

Move to New York

In 1969, Donahue moved from Los Angeles to New York City. He said a few years later:

It took guts to walk out of Hollywood, but it would have been worse to stay. I had a house, seven black Cadillac convertibles, and two wrecked marriages. I already had my head turned; turning back was easy. It doesn't matter if I have a beard or a crewcut. People respond to me because I have a human quality. I know I'll be put down by Hollywood but I don't speak to anybody out there anyway... I smoke grass and ride cycles, my lifestyle is casual, but I'm not a dope fiend or a hippie freak. I've found strength in Jesus Christ and he's easier to follow than Zen Buddhism. I'm not strung out. I'm a very reasonable, professional actor.While in New York Donahue appeared in the daytime CBS drama The Secret Storm for six months. He later called the role "the best part I ever had". By this time, Donahue's drug addiction and alcoholism had ruined him financially. One summer, he was homeless and lived in Central Park. "There was always somebody who could be amused by Troy Donahue," he says. "I'd meet them anywhere, in a park, street, party, in bed. I lived in a bush in Central Park for one summer. I kept everything I had in a backpack."

In 1974, Francis Ford Coppola cast him in a small part in The Godfather Part II as the fiancé of Connie Corleone. His character was named Merle Johnson, a nod to Donahue's real name. Donahue was paid $10,000 for the role.

Return to Hollywood

Donahue moved back to Los Angeles where he married for a fourth time. He acted in occasional television guest spots and appeared in whiskey commercials for the Japanese television market. Donahue said in 1978:After eight years at Warners I did a few independent pictures that never went any place. I travelled, played stickball, had a few marriages and many affairs. I just totally enjoyed myself and did the things I didn't get to do when I was a kid. Now I've decided I wanna go back to work again and I've been encouraged by a lot of people who feel that I have the talent and everything that goes with it.There was even some talk of a TV movie, Return to a Summer Place, but it was never made.

After his fourth marriage ended in 1981, Donahue decided to seek help for his drinking and drug use. In May 1982, he joined Alcoholics Anonymous which he credited for helping him achieve and maintain sobriety. "I look upon my sobriety as a miracle," he says. "I simply do it one day at a time. The obsession to not drink has become as big as the obsession to drink. I was very fortunate."

Later years

Donahue continued to act in films throughout the 1980s and into the late 1990s. He appeared in the feature Grandview USA shot in Pontiac, Illinois. "Crowds of teenage girls would swarm around C. Thomas Howell, and teenage boys around Jamie Lee Curtis. But the major celebrity was Donahue," recalls director Randall Kleiser. "These women who had grown up with him as their heartthrob followed him everywhere."

However he never obtained the recognition that he had in the earlier years of his career. Donahue's final film role was in the 2000 comedy film The Boys Behind the Desk, directed by Sally Kirkland.

Personal life

Donahue was married four times and had one child. His first marriage was to actress Suzanne Pleshette, with whom he had twice co-starred in films. They wed on January 5, 1964 in Beverly Hills. They divorced nine months later, that same year.

On October 21, 1966, Donahue married actress Valerie Allen in Dublin, Ireland. They separated in April 1967, and she filed for divorce in April 1968, charging him with cruelty, divorcing in November 1968.

Donahue's third marriage was to executive secretary Alma Sharpe. They married on November 15, 1969 in Roanoke, Virginia. "I couldn't take care of myself, and I knew this friend would take me under her wing," he says. They divorced in 1972.

Donahue's fourth and final marriage was to land developer Vicki Taylor. They were married in 1979 and divorced in 1981. In his final years, Donahue was in a long-term relationship with mezzo-soprano Zheng Cao, to whom he was engaged and with whom he lived in Santa Monica, California.

Donahue had a son, Sean, by a woman with whom he had a brief relationship in 1969. He only found out about the son in the early 1980s when he ran into the woman again. As he recalled in 1984:

She walked over and introduced herself and I remembered that we had been together four or five times in L.A. in 1969. Nothing serious. Just fun and games. She said, "I'm glad I saw you. I've always wanted to tell you about something. Look over there, Troy." I looked and across the room I saw a 13-year-old spitting image of what I looked like when I was young. "This is your son, Sean," she said. "He's known all his life that you are his father."... I see him every couple of weeks now.

In 1958 Donahue was jailed for 15 days for speeding. In 1961 his one-time fiancée Lili Kardell sued him for damages, claiming he had hit her without provocation.

Death

On August 30, 2001, Donahue suffered a heart attack and was admitted to Saint John's Health Center in Santa Monica. He died there on September 2 at the age of 65.

Filmography

Box office ranking

	 1960: voted 5th most likely star of Tomorrow

	 1961: 24th most popular star in the US

	 1963: 20th most popular star in the US

Theatre credits

	 Stalag 17 (when he was 17)

	 The Owl and the Pussycat (1966)

	 Poor Richard (1967)

In popular culture

	 Troy Donahue was one of the inspirations for The Simpsons character Troy McClure, along with Doug McClure, and a measure of the character's voice actor Phil Hartman.

	 Donahue is mentioned in the song "Look at Me, I'm Sandra Dee", from the 1971 musical Grease, reflecting his status as a teen idol at the time in which the action is set. The line, which is performed by Stockard Channing in the 1978 film version, is as follows: "As for you, Troy Donahue, I know what you want to do."

	 Donahue is also mentioned in the song "Mother" in the musical A Chorus Line, when the character Bobby sings, "If Troy Donahue could be a movie star, then I could be a movie star."


