
#Article: Jann Wenner
#Type: regular article

Jann Simon Wenner (born January 7, 1946) is the co-founder and publisher of the popular culture biweekly Rolling Stone, as well as the current owner of Men's Journal and Us Weekly magazines.

Childhood

Wenner was born in New York City, New York, and grew up in a secular Jewish family.  His parents divorced in 1958, and he and his sisters, Kate and Merlyn, were sent to boarding schools. He graduated from high school at Chadwick School in 1963 and went on to attend the University of California, Berkeley. Before dropping out of Berkeley in 1966, Wenner was active in the Free Speech Movement and produced the column "Something's Happening" in the student-run newspaper, The Daily Californian. With the help of his mentor, San Francisco Chronicle jazz critic Ralph J. Gleason, Wenner landed a job at Ramparts, a high-circulation muckraker, where Gleason was a contributing editor and Wenner worked on the magazine's spinoff newspaper.

Media industry

In 1967, Wenner and Gleason founded Rolling Stone in San Francisco. To get the magazine started, Wenner borrowed $7,500 from family members and from the family of his soon-to-be wife, Jane Schindelheim.

Wenner backed the careers of writers such as Hunter S. Thompson, Joe Klein, Cameron Crowe, Joe Eszterhas and leftist-turned-conservative, P.J. ORourke. Wenner also discovered photographer Annie Leibovitz when she was a 21-year-old San Francisco Art Institute student. Many of Wenners proteges, such as writer/director Cameron Crowe, credit him with giving them their biggest breaks. Tom Wolfe recognized Wenners influence in ensuring that his first novel, The Bonfire of the Vanities, was completed, stating "I was absolutely frozen with fright about getting it done and I decided to serialize it and the only editor crazy enough to do that was Jann."

In 1977, Rolling Stone shifted its base of operations from San Francisco to New York City.The magazines circulation dipped briefly in the late 1970s/early 1980s as Rolling Stone responded slowly in covering the emergence of punk rock and again in the 1990s, when it lost ground to Spin and Blender in coverage of hip hop. Wenner hired former FHM editor Ed Needham, who was then replaced by Will Dana, to turn his flagship magazine around, and by 2006, Rolling Stones circulation was at an all-time high of 1.5 million copies sold every fortnight. In May 2006, Rolling Stone published its 1000th edition with a holographic, 3-D cover modeled on The Beatles Sgt. Peppers Lonely Hearts Club Band album cover.

Wenner has been involved in the conducting and writing of many of the magazines famous Rolling Stone Interviews. Some of his more recent interview subjects have included: Bill Clinton, Al Gore, John Kerry, and Barack Obama for the magazine during their election campaigns and in November 2005 had a major interview with U2 rockstar Bono, which focused on music and politics. Wenners interview with Bono received a National Magazine Award nomination.

Rolling Stone and Jann Wenner are chronicled in two books, Gone Crazy and Back Again as well as Rolling Stone: The Uncensored History. Former Rolling Stone journalist David Weir is working on a biography, as is poet and Beat historian Lewis MacAdams.

Wenner founded the magazine Outside in 1977; William Randolph Hearst III and Jack Ford both worked for the magazine before Wenner sold it a year later. He also briefly managed the magazine Look and in 1993, started the magazine Family Life. In 1985, he bought a share in Us Weekly, followed by a joint purchase of the magazine with The Walt Disney Company the following year. The magazine went weekly in 2000; after a difficult start, it now reaches over 11 million readers a week. In August 2006, Wenner bought out Disneys share and now owns 100% of the magazine.

From 2004 to 2006, Wenner contributed approximately $63,000 to Democratic candidates and liberal organizations.

Wenner was credited with spawning the music sensitized generation that served as the launchpad for the visions of Apple Computer co-founder Steve Jobs in an October 2010 Huffington Post column by Eric Ehrmann, one of his early Rolling Stone writers.

Controversy

Rock and Roll Hall of Fame

Wenner, who was made a member of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Foundation in 1983, has endured controversy during his career as it relates to his involvement in the organization. Fans and supporters of several artists have placed a large amount of blame on Wenner for keeping them out of the Hall of Fame. They claim Wenner has lobbied to keep them from consideration and nomination to the Hall based on personal bias and a dislike for their music.

In June 2007, Monkees bassist Peter Tork came forward and alleged to the New York Post that Wenner is excluding the group: 

Hunter S. Thompson

Hunter S. Thompson was to provide Rolling Stone coverage for the 1976 Presidential Campaign that would appear in a book published by the magazine. Reportedly, as Thompson was waiting for a $75,000 advance check to arrive, he learned that Wenner canceled the endeavor without telling Thompson.

Wenner then asked Thompson to travel to Vietnam to report on what appeared to be the closing of the Vietnam War. Thompson accepted and arrived with the country in chaos, just as the United States was preparing to evacuate and other journalists were scrambling to find transportation out of the region. While there, Thompson learned that Wenner had canceled this excursion as well, and Thompson found himself in Vietnam without health insurance or additional financial support. Thompson's story about the fall of Saigon would not be published in Rolling Stone until ten years later.

These two incidents severely strained the relationship between the author and the magazine, and Thompson contributed far less to the publication in later years.

Hootie and the Blowfish review

Wenner fired notable rock critic Jim DeRogatis in 1996 after DeRogatis published a negative review for an album by the then-popular band Hootie and the Blowfish. Wenner pulled DeRogatis' review from the magazine. Asked by the New York Observer if Wenner was a fan of Hootie and the Blowfish, DeRogatis responded that Wenner "is a fan of any band that sells eight million records." Wenner fired DeRogatis the next day.

Personal life

In the summer following the start of Rolling Stone, Wenner and Jane Schindelheim were married in a small Jewish ceremony. Wenner and his wife separated in 1995, though Jane Wenner still remains a vice president of Wenner Media. She and Wenner have three sons, Alexander Jann, Theodore "Theo" Simon, and Edward Augustus, known as Gus, head of Wenner Media's digital operations.

Since 1995, Wenner's partner has been Matt Nye, a fashion designer. Together, Wenner and Nye have three adopted children, Noah and twins Jude & India Rose.

Awards and honors

	2010: Norman Mailer Prize, Lifetime Achievement in Magazine Publishing

Select Rolling Stone Interview bibliography

	 Bob Dylan, May 3, 2007 (40th Anniversary Issue)

	 Bono, November 3, 2005

	 John Kerry, November 11, 2004

	 Al Gore, November 9, 2000

	 Mick Jagger, December 14, 1995

	 Bill Clinton, December 9, 1993

	 Jerry Garcia, January 20, 1972

	 John Lennon, January 21, 1971

	 Bob Dylan, November 29, 1969

	 Pete Townshend, September 28, 1968


