
#Article: Cullen Douglas
#Type: regular article

Cullen Douglas (born July 19, 1969) is an American actor, playwright, and screenwriter. His most notable television appearances have come from recurring roles on Private Practice, Prison Break, Grey's Anatomy, Scandal, and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D..  His film credits include Wrong Side of Right (2015), Ace Ventura, Jr.: Pet Detective (2009), Shuttle (2008), Sunshine State (2002) and Love Liza (2002). He had a long, successful stage career before becoming a screen actor.

Early life

Douglas was born in Florida and attended the American Musical and Dramatic Academy (1988) and the Florida School of the Arts. He returned to FSOTA in 2010 to give their commencement address. He also completed an acting internship with New Stage Theatre in Jackson, Mississippi.

Acting career

Douglas is best known for his television guest appearances on shows such as Prison Break, Private Practice, and Grey’s Anatomy. His roles have included The Bird Man on ABC’s Grey’s Anatomy and Sapo on FOX’s Prison Break. His other television credits include The Mentalist (2011), CSI: NY (2010), Psych (2010), True Blood (2009), Without a Trace (2008), Criminal Minds (2007), Bones (2006), CSI: Crime Scene Investigation (2006), Charmed (2005) and Six Feet Under (2005).

Douglas's film appearances include Ace Ventura, Jr.: Pet Detective (2009), Shuttle (2008), Sunshine State (2002) and Love Liza (2002).

Douglas has also performed in television commercials for products such as T-Mobile, Kellogg, and FedEx. He is represented by the firm Greene and Associates.

Writing and Stage Career

Douglas previously worked as a writer for both Disney and Nickelodeon and was a contributing editor to Ability magazine. He was the first recipient of The Humanitas Organization's "New Voices" initiative, which paired Cullen alongside Shonda Rhimes. He also wrote and continues to perform across the country in the solo play Afraid to Look Down, which explores his journey in becoming a first-time father to son born with Down syndrome.

He wrote the screenplay for Building Bridges as well as co-writing the film Letters to God. For the stage Cullen wrote and stars in the acclaimed and award winning solo play Afraid to Look Down, which explores the journey he took in becoming a first-time father to a son born with Down syndrome.

Douglas received the "Lillie Stoates," a regional theater award, for Best Supporting Actor in a Play, for his work in The Orlando Theatre Project's "The Lion in Winter."

Filmography

Film

Television

Personal life

Douglas met his wife Rachel in Jackson, Mississippi while performing in the musical Eden. They married in 1994 and have two sons, Gabriel and Cameron. Gabriel was born with Down syndrome and was diagnosed at age fifteen with Leukemia. They live in Los Angeles, California.


