
#Article: Céline Cousteau
#Type: regular article

Céline S. Cousteau (born June 6, 1972) is a French-American explorer, filmmaker, and diver. She is the daughter of the ocean explorer Jean-Michel Cousteau, the granddaughter of Jacques Cousteau, the French explorer, and her brother is Fabien Cousteau.

Cousteau is the founder and executive director of CauseCentric Productions, a non-profit organization that aims to help other organizations communicate their message through film. She has also worked as field producer, on-camera presenter, and photographer on numerous TV documentaries, including PBS's Jean-Michel Cousteau: Ocean Adventures, CBS's Shark: Mind of a Demon, and the Discovery Channel's Mysteries of the Shark Coast. She also co-hosted a 12-part documentary series produced by the Chilean-based NuevoEspacio Producciones, called Oceano: Chile Frente al Mar.

Early life

Cousteau was born in California to Jean-Michel Cousteau and Anne Marie Cousteau. She grew up in France and in the United States. Her family moved from France to North Carolina and Virginia during her early teens. She attended Norfolk Academy in Virginia and graduated from Skidmore College in 1994, where she majored in psychology and minored in studio art. She received her master's degree in international and intercultural training from the School for International Training.

Career

Cousteau has worked as field producer, on-camera presenter and photographer on numerous television documentaries. Notable works include: PBS' successful television series "Jean-Michel Cousteau: Ocean Adventures", CBS's "Mind of a Demon", and Discovery Channel's "Mysteries of the Shark Coast". She co-hosted a 12-part documentary series produced by the Chilean based NuevoEspacio Producciones, called "Oceano: Chile Frente al Mar", during which she explored both diving under water and trekking on land from Antarctica to northern Chile and westward to Easter Island.

Cousteau created "Ocean Inspiration" in 2011 in tribute to her grandfather's 100th anniversary as a platform to celebrate and recognize ocean advocacy in all forms, from science to art, dance to filmmaking.

Cousteau is a member of the Council on Oceans for the Global Agenda of the World Economic Forum. Recommendations from this council serve to guide conversations at the World Economic Forum in Davos. Special Ambassador for La Prairie and Sustainability Partner for Contiki Holidays.


