
#Article: Daniel Winslow
#Type: regular article

Daniel B. "Dan" Winslow (born May 13, 1958) is an American lawyer, Republican Party politician, and former presiding justice of the Wrentham District Court. He was the State Representative for the Ninth Norfolk district from January 2011 to September 2013. Winslow was chief legal counsel to Governor Mitt Romney between 2002 and 2005 and he also served as a presiding justice and appellate division justice in the Massachusetts Trial Court. Winslow ran to be the Republican nominee in the special election to succeed Secretary of State John Kerry in the United States Senate, but lost the primary election. Winslow stepped away from public life to serve as Senior Vice President and General Counsel of Rimini Street, Inc., one of the fastest-growing technology companies in the United States.

Education

Winslow received his bachelor's degree in political science from Tufts University and his J.D. from Boston College Law School. He lives in Truro with his wife and three children (Hannah, Parker, and Peter) and divides his time between Massachusetts and Silicon Valley. Winslow was a Senior Fellow at the Tufts University Tisch College of Citizenship and Public Service and a lecturer of government reform at Tufts University and Trial Advocacy at Boston College.

Massachusetts House of Representatives

Winslow's campaign for State Representative focused on cutting taxes by cutting state spending, enhancing local core services, such as education, police, fire, public safety, and infrastructure, and using the Internet to improve government accountability and transparency. This seat was vacated by Representative Richard Ross, who won the seat in the Massachusetts Senate that was vacated by Scott Brown upon his election to the United States Senate in January 2010.  In reaction to the anti-bullying legislation being considered in Congress, Winslow has called on the House and Senate conference committee to adopt criminal penalties and to use Restorative Justice in the criminal system. He took office January 5, 2011. He resigned effective September 29, 2013 to join a software services provider as senior vice president and general counsel.

Public service, associations and honors

Winslow participated in local government for 15 years, including serving on the Norfolk Planning Board, Affordable Housing Committee, DPW Commission, Zoning Bylaw Study Committee, and Correctional Facilities Advisory Committee. As a member of the Planning Board, Winslow drafted "Smart Growth" zoning strategy including tradition New England Development, architectural design review, and creation of pedestrian and kid-friendly neighborhood streets that enhanced property value. Winslow is a member of the Massachusetts and Federal Bar Association, the American Judicature Society, and the International Institute for Conflict & Resolution (CPR). He was cited by Massachusetts Lawyers Weekly newspaper in 2007 as one of the 35 most influential lawyers in Massachusetts in the past 35 years and was recognized as a Super Lawyer in Massachusetts by Law and Politics magazine. He served as general counsel for Americans Elect, a group which unsuccessfully attempted to nominate a third party or independent candidate for president in 2012 and provide him or her with ballot access nationwide.


