
#Article: David Guido Pietroni
#Type: regular article

David Guido Pietroni (born 9 March 1970 in Genoa) is an Italian artistic producer.

Biography

He started working very young as a promoter and tour manager for Italian singers, including Enrico Ruggeri, Massimo Di Cataldo, Gianluca Grignani, Massimo Riva, Tiziano Ferro, Biagio Antonacci, Zucchero, Vasco Rossi and Eros Ramazzotti.

Thanks to his collaboration with Compay Segundo, protagonist of one of the most important movie and home video music projects of all times: Buena Vista Social Club produced in Cuba by Ry Cooder and directed by Wim Wenders, he exploring for a long time the most important music places of the Caribbean island. He came back to Italy and devoted him to new artistic languages between music and the movies which will go with him from now on.

In 2002, with the "Arturo Toscanini Foundation", he is the producer of Rigoletto, directed by Vittorio Sgarbi and with costumes by Vivienne Westwood. Represented in Piazza del Campo in Siena (Italy) with an audience of thirty two thousand people, Rigoletto is the biggest Italian opera event of that year.

From the live shooting of the show he produced the DVD entitled Rigoletto Story. Presented with Quentin Tarantino at the Venice Screenings within the Venice Biennale in 2004, the DVD is distributed worldwide by Columbia TriStar and Sony Pictures Home Entertainment. Pietroni, with Rigoletto Story, he was eligible in 2005, with two nominations, to the Grammy Awards in the categories "Best Surround Sound" and "Best Long Form Music Video".

Since 1990 he is manager and producer of Vittorio Sgarbi. Together with Sgarbi he has planned the season of the Arcimboldi Theater in Milan, the prestigious theater which has hosted the shows of La Scala Theater for three years, during its restoration works. More than 170 shows, a world preview and thirty national first performances, among which the performances of the musical Cats in the original edition by Andrew Lloyd Webber, the Italian debuts of Richard O'Brien's The Rocky Horror Show, Beethoven's Ninth Symphony conducted by Lorin Maazel and co-produced by the Toscanini Symphonic Orchestra, Peter Stein's interpretation of Faust, Katie Melua and Lenny Kravitz at Arena Civica, July 14, 2008.

In co-operation with the London's Victoria and Albert Museum and Vittorio Sgarbi, he produced in 2007 the tribute exhibition of the renowned English fashion designer Vivienne Westwood, which took place for more than four months at the Palazzo Reale of Milan.

In 2012 he is the founder of a project that involves the construction of a "social e-commerce" portal: the first and the biggest marketplace platform dedicated to Art, which have as its artistic director the influential art critic and ambassador for the Arts to Expó 2015 Vittorio Sgarbi. The name is bebopart®.

In 2015 he is sound designer to the project "A message to Space". Produced by Hyundai.

Since 2004 as been a voting member of the Recording Academy and today he is member of the Tribeca Film Institute (since 2006).

Awards

	 He has obtained two nominations to the Grammy Awards in the categories “Best Surround Sound” and “Best Long Form Music Video”.

	 He won three Best Event Awards (2004) in the categories "Best Cultural Event of the Year", "Best Location" and "Best Sound"

	 Since 2004 he is a voting member of the Recording Academy


