
#Article: Deborah Needleman
#Type: regular article

Deborah Needleman, an American publishing executive, was the founding editor in chief of Domino magazine. She is editor in chief of T: The New York Times Style Magazine.

Early life

Needleman grew up in Cherry Hill, New Jersey and graduated from George Washington University.

Career

Needleman worked as a photographer's assistant for a freelance photographer before becoming a photo editor at The Washington Post Sunday magazine. She wrote about gardens and design for The New York Times, Slate, and House & Garden, where she was editor-at-large.

T Magazine

Deborah Needleman was named editor of T: The New York Times Style Magazine in September 2012.

The first issue of T under Deborah Needleman featured Lee Radziwill on the cover. As part of the 10th Anniversary issue of T in October 2014, the magazine looked back on the top ten T Magazine covers of all time.

domino

Launched by Condé Nast Publications in Spring 2005, domino was a style magazine centered on the home. In its first year, domino was honored with every media award for the best new magazine, including The Hot List Startup of the Year by Adweek, Top Launch of the Year by Media Industry Newsletter and The A-List 10 under 50 by Advertising Age. Needleman was named as a Top Talent to Watch from Women’s Wear Daily and a Circle of Excellence award winner by the International Furniture and Design Association (IFDA). In its third year, the magazine has grown to a rate base of 800K.The magazine received two 2008 National Magazine Award nominations from the American Society of Magazine Editors (ASME). In October 2008, domino released its first book, domino: the book of decorating, published by Simon & Schuster.

It was announced on 28 January 2009, that Conde Nast would cease publishing Domino, and that Needleman left the company.

WSJ

In 2010, Needleman became the editor of WSJ. magazine In 2012, Needleman moved to T: The New York Times Style Magazine as the editor in chief.

Personal

Needleman lives in Manhattan with her husband, Slate editor in chief Jacob Weisberg, and their two children, Lily and Nate.


