
#Article: Dilip Sinha
#Type: regular article

Dilip Sinha (born 1954) is an Indian diplomat who served in the Indian Foreign Service from 1978 to 2014. He is currently Chairman of the Manipur Public Service Commission, India. 

Mr Sinha serves on the board of directors of the Asian Development Research Institute Society, Bihar, India, and as Vice-President and member of the board of directors of the Indo-Swiss Ayurveda Foundation. 

As a member of the Indian Foreign Service, Mr Sinha served as India's envoy to the United Nations in Geneva, Ambassador to Greece and Special Secretary for International Organisations and Environmental Diplomacy in the Ministry of External Affairs (India). 

Indian Foreign Service

Dilip Sinha is a member of the 1978 batch of the Indian Foreign Service. He served as India's Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the United Nations in Geneva from 2012 to 2014  and as India's Ambassador to Greece from 2007 to 2010. 

As part of his multilateral assignments, Sinha represented India in its three year term on the United Nations Human Rights Council and was elected Vice-President of the Human Rights Council Bureau.Sinha was also elected Vice Convener of the South Centre Council of Representatives in Geneva.  Prior to taking up his assignment in Geneva, Sinha served as Special Secretary for International Organizations and Environmental Diplomacy in the Government of India. He was responsible for coordinating India diplomacy at the multilateral level, including its 2011-2012 term on the UN Security Council and on climate change negotiations.

Mr Sinha was Deputy High Commissioner of India to Bangladesh from 2002 to 2004 and Deputy Chief of Mission at the Embassy of India in Brazil from 1999 to 2002. Earlier international postings include Counsellor and Minister (Economic) in the Permanent Mission of India to the UN Offices in Geneva, First Secretary at the High Commission of India in Pakistan and Second Secretary at the Embassy of India in Egypt and in Germany. At the Ministry of External Affairs (India), apart from serving as Special Secretary and Additional Secretary from 2010 to 2012, Mr Sinha was Joint Secretary in charge of the Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iran desk from 2005 to 2007, Deputy Secretary for Press Relations from 1990 to 1991 and Director in the Prime Minister's Office (India) from 1992 to 1995.

Personal life

Dilip Sinha is married to Shrimi Sinha and has two sons. He speaks English, Hindi and German fluently. 

Early life and education

Dilip Sinha was born in Kanpur, India. He obtained his Masters degree in Political Sciencefrom Patna University in Patna, Bihar.


