
#Article: Campbell Scott
#Type: regular article

Campbell Scott (born July 19, 1961) is an American actor, director, producer, and voice artist.

Early life

Scott was born on July 19, 1961 in New York City, the son of actors George C. Scott and Canadian-born Colleen Dewhurst. He graduated from Lawrence University in 1983. His brother is Alexander Scott.

Career

In 1990, Scott played a lead role in the ground-breaking film Longtime Companion, which chronicles the early years of the AIDS/HIV epidemic and its impact upon a group of American friends. In the following year, Scott co-starred in the movie Dying Young (in which his mother also appeared) alongside Julia Roberts. He also appears in the 1992 movie Singles, and in 1996, he teamed up with Stanley Tucci to direct the film Big Night. The film met with critical acclaim and was nominated for the "Grand Jury Prize" at the Sundance Film Festival. For their work, Scott and Tucci won both the New York Film Critics Circle Award and the Boston Society of Film Critics Award for Best New Director.

In 2002, he was awarded the Best Actor prize from the National Board of Review for his notable performance in Roger Dodger. Scott starred in Six Degrees on ABC in 2006.

In 2005 / 2006, Scott served as the reader for the audiobook versions of Stephen King's bestsellers The Shining and Cell.

In 2007, Scott lent his voice for the narration of a Chevron Corporation television ad, as well as the critically acclaimed Iraq War documentary film, No End in Sight. Next up for Scott was the 2009 drama Handsome Harry. Scott also has a recurring role on the USA drama Royal Pains, as Boris Kuester von Jurgens-Ratenicz.

On August 28, 2009, TVGuide.com confirmed Scott was cast for the third season of Damages. Scott was a series regular, playing Joe Tobin, the son of indicted Bernie Madoff-like Louis Tobin (Len Cariou). The season aired from January to April 2010.

In May 2010, Scott provided the voice-over for a new Häagen-Dazs TV commercial called "Ode to Flavor". The ad was created by Goodby, Silverstein & Partners, directed by Noah Marshall with art direction by Croix Cagnon. He played the role of Richard Parker, the father of Peter Parker, in the 2012 film The Amazing Spider-Man. Scott reprised his role in the 2014 film The Amazing Spider-Man 2.

Personal life

Scott has two sons, Malcolm and Callan. He lives with his family in north west Connecticut.

Filmography


