
#Article: James Mulva
#Type: regular article

James J. Mulva (born 1946) is Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of ConocoPhillips. As announced on July 14, 2011, Mr. Mulva intends to retire upon completion of the separation of ConocoPhillips into two stand-alone publicly traded companies. Until then, he will continue to serve as ConocoPhillips’ CEO and lead the separation efforts. 

Career

Mr. Mulva served as president and chief executive officer of ConocoPhillips from 2002 to 2004. Prior to that, he served as chairman and chief executive officer of Phillips Petroleum Company from 1999 to 2002. He had served as Phillips’ president and chief operating officer since May 1994 and executive vice president since January 1994. He had been senior vice president in 1993 and chief financial officer since 1990, at which time he joined the company’s management committee. Mr. Mulva is a member of the National Petroleum Council, which is an oil and natural gas advisory committee to the US Secretary of Energy.

Mr. Mulva served as chairman of the American Petroleum Institute in 2005. He was named 2002 Petroleum Executive of the Year in recognition of the aggressive steps he took to grow and position Phillips Petroleum Company to compete in an increasingly difficult business environment.

Mr. Mulva earned his bachelor’s and master’s degrees in business administration from the University of Texas at Austin's McCombs School of Business. Immediately after graduating, Mr. Mulva served as a U.S. Navy officer until beginning his career with Phillips in 1973.

It was announced on January 24, 2014, that Mr. and Mrs. Mulva will donate $60 million to the University of Texas at Austin, with $40 million going towards the McCombs School of Business and $20 million to the Cockrell School of Engineering. 

“We’ve been looking for the right project so we could, in a more significant way, help support The University of Texas and its commitment to education and research,” says Mulva, who was named a UT Distinguished Alumnus five years ago and whose previous philanthropy includes gifts to the Red McCombs School of Business and Robert Strauss Center for International Security and Law.

The Mulvas also donated $15 million to the College of Liberal Arts toward construction of its new building on the East Mall. The six-story structure will have an entire floor for the University’s Naval, Army and Air Force ROTC units, which are part of the college.

Mulva says he was motivated by his own experiences as a student. “I went through ROTC — that’s the only way I could attend UT — so I really want to support ROTC students,” he says. “For these young men and women, it’s not about making money. It’s all about service to the country. They’re very dedicated and bright students.”

Personal

Along with his wife, Miriam, Mr. Mulva pledged $7 million towards the construction of a new library at St. Norbert College in De Pere, WI, the largest gift in the school's history; the library is named in honor of the Mulvas.

Mr. Mulva received an honorary Doctor of Engineering degree at the 136th annual commencement ceremony at the Colorado School of Mines on May 14, 2010. At this event, he also gave his keynote address, "Passing the Torch of Responsibility."


