
#Article: Donald T. Critchlow
#Type: regular article

Donald T. Critchlow (born May 18, 1948) is a historian specializing in American political history.

Biography

Early life

Donald Thomas Critchlow was born on May 18, 1948 in Pasadena, California. He was educated at Maryville High School in Phoenix, Arizona. He graduated from San Francisco State University in 1968 and received his M.A. (1972) and Ph.D. (1978) from the University of California, Berkeley. 

Career

He was an Associate Professor of History at the University of Notre Dame, before moving to Saint Louis University in St. Louis, Missouri as a Professor of History. In the fall of 2010, he accepted a professorship in History at Arizona State University. In 2014 he became Director of the Center for Political Thought and Leadership as ASU.

He is founding President on the Institute for Political History, a non-profit education foundation that sponsors the Policy History Conference, graduate travel awards, and other academic and historical projects. 

He has also been a Visiting Professor at University of Hong Kong (1997-98) and University of Warsaw in Poland (1988-89). In addition he has been a Guest Scholar at the Brookings Institution, a fellow at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, and a fellow at the Center for Philosophy and Politics. He has lectured throughout Europe and China as a State Department Distinguished Lecturer and as a Fulbright Scholar.

His most recent books include American Political History: A Very Short Introduction  (Oxford University Press, 2015) and When Hollywood Was Right: How Movie Stars, Movie Moguls, and Big Business Remade American Politics (Cambridge University Press, 2013. He is the author and editor of many other books. He has also co-authored a textbook on American history with Paula Baker and W. J. Rorabaugh, and edited a five-volume history of the United States published in Warsaw, Poland. In 1987, he co-founded the quarterly interdisciplinary Journal of Policy History. Published by Cambridge University Press, the Journal has published a number of prize winning essays and sponsors an interdisciplinary conference. 

Personal life

He is married to Patricia Powers Critchlow and they have two daughters, Agnieszka Critchlow and Magda Critchlow, and three grandchildren, Andrew, Alexander, and Joshua.


