
#Article: Tricia Leigh Fisher
#Type: regular article

Tricia Leigh Fisher (born December 26, 1968) is an American actress and singer.

Early life

Fisher was born in Burbank, California, to singer Eddie Fisher and actress Connie Stevens. Her older sister is actress Joely Fisher. She has two half-siblings, actor and producer Todd Fisher and actress Carrie Fisher of Star Wars fame, from her father's previous marriage to actress Debbie Reynolds. Fisher's parents divorced when she was a baby and she and Joely were raised by Stevens. As children, both Tricia and Joely began performing on stage in their mother's Las Vegas show. They toured the world with their mother, attending many different schools and having tutors. Both girls would go on to attend Beverly Hills High School.

Career

Acting

Fisher made her debut in the 1985 crime drama Stick, starring Burt Reynolds, Candice Bergen, George Segal, and Charles Durning. She then starred as Daphne Ziegler in the 1986 comedy Pretty Smart. In 1987, Fisher appeared in the television movie Strange Voices, opposite Valerie Harper. The following year, she landed a role in the TV movie Bring Me the Head of Dobie Gillis, also starring her mother as well as Dwayne Hickman and Bob Denver. In 1989, Fisher appeared in two movies, Hollywood Chaos and C.H.U.D. II: Bud the C.H.U.D., followed by roles in the 1990 comedy, Book of Love and Arizona Dream starring Johnny Depp, Jerry Lewis, and Faye Dunaway.

In addition to Fisher's work in movies, she has also made guest appearances on Our House, Growing Pains, Ellen, Wild Card, 7th Heaven, and 'Til Death. In 1996, she portrayed Heidi Fleiss in the CBS television movie The Making of a Hollywood Madam.

On October 7, 2006, Fisher was honored at The Thalians 51st Anniversary Ball along with producer Marc Cherry, her mother Connie Stevens, and her sister Joely Fisher. They performed together at the event at the Hyatt Regency Century Plaza Hotel in Century City, California.

In September 2011, Fisher and her husband Byron Thames, appeared in her mother's Las Vegas stage show. In July 2012, Fisher, her husband and children began appearing on the ABC Family reality series Beverly Hills Nannies.

Music

Fisher performed the theme song for her 1986 movie Pretty Smart, and released a self-titled debut album for Atco Records in 1990. The album's single "Empty Beach", written by Dennis East, was a modest hit.

Filmography

Discography

Albums

	 1990: Tricia Leigh Fisher

	 1990: Dreams‡

Singles

	 1990: "Empty Beach"

	 1990: "Let's Make the Time"

	 1990: "My Heart Holds On"/"Good As Gold"‡

	 ‡ Japan release only


