
#Article: Eduardo Costantini
#Type: regular article

Eduardo Francisco Costantini (born September 17, 1946) is an Argentine real estate developer, businessman, philanthropist and head of the venture capital firm Consultatio, based in Buenos Aires.

Life and times

Costantini was born in Buenos Aires to María Carolina Malbrán and Vicente Costantini. He enrolled in the Argentine Catholic University, and graduated with a degree in Economics in 1971. He earned a Master's degree in the same discipline at the University of East Anglia, in 1975, established a brokerage house, Consultatio Bursátil, in 1980, and completed a Capital Markets Course at the London School of Economics in 1981. 

He re-established Consultatio as an asset management firm in 1991, and served as Vice President of BBVA Banco Francés between 1991 and 1993. He then ventured into the local real estate market; some of his best known real estate projects in Argentina include the development of the Nordelta district, (Consultatio was a 50 percent investor in the project) and the construction of twin luxury office towers in the Catalinas Norte office park. 

He has more than 30 years of experience in the financial and real estate businesses. Costantini is the founder, Chairman, CEO, and controlling shareholder of Consultatio Asset Management Co., Consultatio S.A. (Argentina), and Consultatio Real Estate Inc. (United States). He is also Chairman of Nordelta S.A., one of the main Latin American urban developments. The real estate companies operate across four business segments (Master planned communities, commercial buildings, residential towers, and tourism) in Buenos Aires (Argentina), Rocha (Uruguay), and Miami (United States).

He amassed one of the largest, most valuable and most diverse collections of modern and contemporary Latin American art in the world. Establishing a foundation to the effect in 1997, he assembled the vast majority of these works are housed in his personal museum, the Museo de Arte Latinoamericano de Buenos Aires (MALBA); inaugurated in 2001, MALBA is one of the most significant arts institutions in the Argentine capital. Costantini attended an event that occurred in Mexico City on May 23, 2003, hosted by Carlos Slim Helú for 30 of Latin America's most important businessmen in a gathering officially referred to as "Latin American Businessmen: An Encounter Between Fathers And Sons." 

Costantini is a member of the Chairman's Council of the Museum of Modern Art, New York, of the Advisory Committee of the David Rockefeller Center for Latin American Studies, at Harvard, and a founding member of the Synergos Global Philanthropist Circle, in New York.

See also

	MALBA.


