
#Article: Eleanor Burns
#Type: regular article

Eleanor Burns was born on July 3, 1945 in Pennsylvania. She first started stitching on her Aunt Edna's feed sacks. Her first book “Make a Quilt in a Day: Log Cabin Pattern” was self-published in 1978. Her Quilt in a Day TV series first aired in 1990. She is an official spokeswoman for Babylock, USA, a sewing machine manufacturer. http://www.rfdtv.com/story/22978189/quilt-in-a-day

Summary

Over thirty years ago Eleanor Burns introduced her first Quilt in a Day book, beginning a quilt making revolution. She invited all types of sewers to participate in an age-old tradition using her unique style; a diverse combination of cutting and sewing applications which replaced scissors and templates with rips and strips, bringing rotary speed to patchwork. She also introduced an incredibly rapid stitching system, applying the method of assembly line sewing to piecework. Her concise, step-by-step directions were easy to grasp, allowing anyone to be successful at making a quilt. Eleanor Burns gave quilt makers techniques that compacted months into merely a day, a quilt in a day. Today, as she continues to passionately devote herself to nurturing and motivating thousands of want-to be quilters with needed self-confidence, her name and techniques have become synonymous with quiltmaking.

Early life

Family

Mother & Father: Erwin and Erma KnoechelSiblings:Mary RankinPatricia KnoechelBurce KnoechelJudith l. Knoechel Eleanor's youngest sister Judy died on Tuesday evening. (1/3/2012) Judy worked for Quilt in a Day for as long as the company was in existence. She was the wholesale/warehouse manager. She wrote these books for Quilt in a Day "Stockings & Small Quilts" and "Courthouse Steps". Judy was also the creator and maker of all the Mini Magnet quilt kits on the website. In the early days, Judy took care of Grant and Orion while Eleanor was on the road promoting her books.http://www.legacy.com/obituaries/butlereagle/obituary.aspx?n=judith-l-knoechel&pid=155418286http://www.quiltingboard.com/main-f1/eleanor-burns-sister-has-passed-t174826.html

Education

Koala Studios

Eleanor Burns added space, storage and style to her sewing rooms with Koala Studios http://www.sewingandcraftclub.com/index.cfm?fuseaction=category.display&category_id=370. Watch Eleanor's video and view her photo galleries to see how she transformed her space with Koala Studios http://mykoalastudio.com/eleanor-burns/eleanor-burns-koala-studio-makeover-part-2/.

Koala studios is the leading brand of sewing furniture and sold exclusively through the best sewing, quilting and embroidery retailers.Koala Studios are built in the United States with the utmost in craftsmanship and quality. Every detail of your Koala Studio from the environmentally-friendly, highest-grade engineered wood base to the steel components and decorative handles were chosen with quality, elegance and luxury in mind.

With all-new state-of-the-art equipment, Koala is able to incorporate advanced and requested design features unique in the sewing industry, including customizing options. Each studio is hand-built by furnishing experts in the heartland of America.

AccuQuilt

Endorsements

Elna USA made Eleanor Burns an official spokeswoman in 1997. In 1999 she was honored with a limited edition “Quilter’s Dream Signature Series” sewing machine. After the Elna Sewing Machine label was sold in 2006, Eleanor was invited to rejoin the Tacony Corporation, makers of Baby Lock Sewing Machines, as spokeswoman for the Quilter's Dream Sewing Machine Series. Tacony Corporation is an underwriter for the Quilt in a Day TV series.

Television Series

Quilt in a Day, the television series has been shown on PBS stations Nationwide for over 22 years. RFD-TV began airing the Quilt in a Day series in 2005 and continues to draw large audiences. With introduction of streaming video via the internet, Eleanor can also be found with on-going programs on four websites: Quilter’s News Network, The Quilting School and on the Quilt in a Day Media Theater at Quilt in a Day's website.

Fabric Line

Benartex, Inc. and Eleanor collaborated to design Eleanor’s Anniversary Florals in 1998. This fabric line was showcased in “Grandmother’s Garden Quilt” book. With the overwhelming success of this line, Rainbow Florals was introduced in 2001. Eleanor designed 6 color ways consisting of large-scale prints, floral strips, checks, and tone on tone prints. A third line of fabric, Yours Truly, Eleanor Burns and Yours Truly Holiday debuted in May, 2003. Since then, she has designed 4 additional fabric collections for Benartex including Magic Vine, Victory Garden, True Blue and Perennials (2 colorful seasons).

Awards and Recognitions

Shopping Quilt in a Day

Online

On Eleanor's Quilt in a Day website, quiltinaday.com, you will find everything you need to make a quilt, whether you are a beginning quilter or an advanced quilter. You will find quilt books, quilt patterns, specialty quilting rulers, quilting DVD's, quilting notions, quilt novels, quilt related gifts and hundreds of bolts of quilt fabric! A wide variety of quilt kits are available to make your quilting adventure even easier to get started! Looking for free quilt block patterns? You will find a variety of them on the website. Also feel free to watch 200+ quilting videos of Eleanor's television series and her live filmed quilting block party for free!

Retail Stores

Paducah, KY

Shop at Eleanor's quilt shop located in downtown Paducah, near the AQS Quilt Museum. The shop is fully stocked with notions, gifts, quilt books, patterns and rulers. Enjoy shopping thought thousands of yards of quality cotton quilt fabric at only $6.00 a yard. Our knowledge and helpful staff is on hand and eager to assist you with your needs.

San Marcos, CA

Located in San Marcos, California (about a half hour north of San Diego), the Quilt in a Day store is a friendly, creative environment for your quilting and shopping pleasure. The store carries a hand-picked selection of 100% cotton quilting fabrics, and of course, all of the Quilt in a Day book titles. The friendly and helpful staff is always happy to help you pick the perfect fabrics for your quilt. Register for a class, or attend a fun "Demo Day" with entertainment, flying scraps and refreshments. The San Marcos location also holds the video studio where the Quilt in a Day program is taped.


