
#Article: Elizabeth Colbert Busch
#Type: regular article

Elizabeth Colbert Busch (; born December 10, 1954) is the Director of Business Development at Clemson University’s Restoration Institute, and was the Democratic Party nominee for the 2013 special election for South Carolina's 1st congressional district, losing to Mark Sanford. She is the sister of comedian Stephen Colbert.

On January 18, 2013, Colbert Busch announced her candidacy for the U.S. House as a member of the Democratic Party to fill the seat vacated by Tim Scott upon his appointment to the U.S. Senate. She lost the special election for a seat in the House of Representatives in South Carolina's 1st congressional district to former South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford on May 7, 2013. She chose not to run again in 2014.

Early life and education

Born in St. Louis, Missouri, Colbert Busch is the eighth of eleven children of parents James William Colbert, Jr., who served as the first Vice President of academic affairs at the Medical University of South Carolina, and Lorna (Tuck) Colbert, who was a homemaker. The Colbert family is of Irish, English, and distant German descent.  She briefly attended the University of South Carolina, but returned to Charleston after her father and two brothers Peter and Paul were among seventy-one passengers who died on Eastern Air Lines Flight 212, in 1974. She then enrolled in the College of Charleston, receiving her B.A. in Intermodal Transportation and Logistics Management, and was named to the National Dean’s List in 1988.

Elizabeth Colbert Busch is married to Claus Wyman Busch III. She has three children with her ex-husband Robert Legare: Mary Legare Middleton (grandchildren Elizabeth Ann and Thomas Bradley Middleton Jr.); Robert Walker Legare Jr; and Catherine Ann Legare.

She was arrested in 1988 for contempt of court during her divorce from her previous husband.

Career

After graduating, she completed a South Carolina State Ports Authority business development internship, and worked for Associated Maritime Industries Inc, as a liaison between the AMI and the U.S. Federal and State Governments. She then worked as the Regional Director for Sales and Marketing and the Director of Business Development at Orient Overseas Container Line (OOCL), where she was responsible for international maritime relations and South Atlantic and North American sales. She left OOCL in 2008, when she was hired to be the Director of Business Development at Clemson University’s Restoration Institute, described by the Charleston Post and Courier as “the school’s corporate matchmaker” for the University’s development projects for wind turbine testing, water studies, and renewable energy. Colbert Busch also works as the Director of Sales and Marketing Clemson’s Wind Turbine Drivetrain Testing Facility.

Colbert Busch is a founder and former member of the Executive Board of Directors of Charleston Women in International Trade, and former member of the College of Charleston’s Business College Alumni Advisory Board. She’s also served as chairwoman of the 2006 S.C. International Trade Conference, the chairwoman of the Maritime Association Port of Charleston and is board member of the Charleston Metro Chamber of Commerce.

2013 congressional campaign

On January 18, 2013, Colbert Busch announced that she would run for the Democratic nomination in the 2013 special election for South Carolina's 1st congressional district to fill the vacancy of Tim Scott, who was appointed to the United States Senate after incumbent Senator Jim DeMint resigned to head conservative think tank The Heritage Foundation. In the March 19 Democratic primary, she was to face Charleston businessman Martin Skelly, the founder of the Russian-based private equity firm UFG Asset Management.

On February 11, 2013, Martin Skelly dropped out of the race, endorsing Colbert Busch.

On March 19, 2013, Colbert Busch handily won the Democratic primary, obtaining over 95% of the vote compared to perennial candidate Ben Frasier's 4%. She ran but was defeated by former South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford. During the election, she garnered 45.3% of the vote compared to Sanford's 54.2%.

Colbert Busch supported background checks as part of a controversial gun control bill that was defeated by the U.S. Senate.


