
#Article: Emilie Brown
#Type: regular article

Emilie Colleen de Azevedo Brown (Born January 26, 1971 in Encino, California) is an American voice actress. Before moving out of the Los Angeles area, she did several anime voice roles mostly under the names Emily Brown, Mary Cobb and Marie Downing. One of her earliest voice acting roles was Annie Labelle in the 1980s crossover anime hit Robotech when she was 13 years old. After graduating from Brigham Young University in 1996 with a theatre degree, she continued her career in the entertainment industry, doing voiceover work for numerous TV and radio commercials, cartoons, CD-ROMs, television shows and major motion pictures.

In 1996, her sister Rachel Coleman and Rachel's husband Aaron discovered that their oldest daughter Leah was deaf. From the beginning, they have found that teaching her 'hearing' peers even a few basic signs builds bonds of friendship and community that every child needs. Brown's first son, Alex - one year younger than Leah - made his first sign at 10 months of age by telling his mom he wanted "milk." Brown has seen first-hand the communication benefits that ASL offers all children, including miraculous results for children with special needs. In 2001, Brown teamed up with Coleman to create Signing Time! - an entertaining children's public television and video series that teaches basic American Sign Language (ASL) to children of all abilities. She serves as the director and producer, and has been the creative force behind the development of concepts, scripts, film and post-production of over 26 Signing Time! episodes, as well as Baby Signing Time, Practice Time and all other Two Little Hands Productions.

Filmography

Anime voice roles

	Ah! My Goddess The Movie - Ex

	 Akira (2001 Pioneer dub) - Female Newscaster 1, Female Nurse

	Battle Athletes Victory - Jessie Gurtlant

	Cowboy Bebop - Stella (Ep. 8)

	El Hazard: The Alternative World - Qawool Towles

	Fushigi Yûgi - Hotohori (Young), Additional Voices

	Gate Keepers - Yasue Okamori

	The Legend of Black Heaven - Kotoko

	Mobile Suit Gundam: The 08th MS Team - Aina Sahalin

	Outlaw Star - Melfina

	Robotech:The New Generation - Annie Labelle (credited as Mary Cobb)

	Saber Marionette J Again - Lorelei

	Saint Tail - Eri

	Serial Experiments Lain - Alice Mizuki

	Sol Bianca: The Legacy - Flor

	Trigun - Rem Saverem (singing voice), Michelle

Other voice roles

	 Final Fantasy IX - Village children, creatures

	 Little Lulu - Little Lulu

	 Rachel & the TreeSchoolers - Penny, Simon, Chroma Chameleon

	 The Swan Princess - Fountain girl

Two Little Hands Productions crew

	 Signing Time! - producer, director, writer (2006 - Present)

	 Baby Signing Time - executive producer, creator

	 Rachel & the TreeSchoolers - executive producer, director


