
#Article: Erick Thohir
#Type: regular article

Erick Thohir (born 30 May 1970) is an Indonesian businessman. He is the president and majority owner of Italian football team Internazionale and the majority owner of American soccer club D.C. United.

Early and personal life

Erick Thohir was born on 30 May 1970. His father is Teddy Thohir, was a co-owner of the automotive group Astra International with William Soeryadjaya. His brother, Garibaldi Thohir, is an investment banker and coal entrepreneur. He also has a sister, Rika Thohir. As a child the younger Thohir helped in the family business. Thohir received his master's degree in 1993 in the United States.Currently, Thohir family holding company, TNT Group, have shares in many biggest indonesian company as Coal industries, Automotive dealers, Automotive Financing, Media, Restaurants and Real Estate. TNT group had a revenue in 2014 of around 1 billion of dollars. , Erick Thohir has four children. He is a Muslim.

Career

Upon his return to Indonesia, together with Muhammad Lutfi, Wishnu Wardhana and R. Harry Zulnardy, he formed the Mahaka Group.

In 2001, the Mahaka group bought the newspaper Republika, then facing bankruptcy. Because of Thohir's background in communications, he was chosen to lead the paper. Inexperienced with the world of newspapers, Thohir received support from his father, as well as founder of Kompas Jakob Oetama and founder of Jawa Pos Dahlan Iskan. The Mahaka group later acquired the Chinese-focused newspaper Harian Sin Chew Indonesia, a localization of Sin Chew Daily.

A 2009 report in the Jakarta Globe noted that Thorir's holdings included the lifestyle and sports magazines a+, Parents Indonesia, and Golf Digest, newspapers Harian Sin Chew Indonesia and Republika, the television station JakTV, radio stations GEN 98.7 FM, Prambors FM, Delta FM, and FeMale Radio, as well as numerous advertising, ticketing, entertainment and Web sites. He is also the founder of two charities, the education-oriented Darma Bakti Mahaka Foundation and Dompet Dhuafa Republika. By 2011, he and Anindya Bakrie co-owned the television stations tvOne and antv, as well as the internet news site Viva News.

Sports team ownership

After negotiations started post the 2011 NBA All-Star Game with former basketball agent Jason Levien and managing owner Joshua Harris, Thohir became part of the consortia that bought the Philadelphia 76ers. The consortia included actor Levien, Harris, Will Smith, his wife Jada Pinkett Smith, David S. Blitzer, of the private equity firm Blackstone Group, hedge fund manager Art Wrubel, former Vail Resorts CEO Adam Aron, Martin Geller, David Heller, Travis Hennings, James Lassiter, Marc Leder, Michael Rubin, and Indonesian businessmen Handy Soetedjo. Comcast-Spectacor and Harris began talks in the summer of 2011. The deal was announced on July 13, 2011.

Thohir is currently president of the Southeast Asia Basketball Association and, up to 2006, president of the Indonesian Basketball Association (). He is also owner of the basketball teams Satria Muda BritAma Jakarta and Indonesia Warriors.

In 2012, Thohir and Levien were named the new majority joint-owners of Major League Soccer club D.C. United.

Presidency of Internazionale

In September 2013, Internazionale club president and owner Massimo Moratti confirmed that he was in discussions to sell a majority 70% stake in the club to Thohir. On October 15, 2013 after a long negotiation, International Sports Capital, led by Thohir, became the majority shareholder of Inter, acquiring a 70% stake of the club. On 15 November 2013, the club's general meeting appointed Thohir as new president of Internazionale, replacing Moratti, who will remain with the club as honorary president.

Sports Team Ownerhip

Basketball Clubs

	  Philadelphia 76ers

	  Satria Muda

	  Indonesia Warriors

Football Clubs

	  D.C. United

	  Internazionale

	  Persib Bandung


