
#Article: Paula Taylor
#Type: regular article

Paula Taylor (พอลล่า เทเลอร์, born as Punlapa Margaret Taylor on January 20, 1983) is a Thai actress, model and presenter.

Personal life

Taylor was born in Chulalongkorn hospital, Bangkok, Thailand. Two weeks after she was born, the family returned to Australia. Her father is of British descent and her mother is of Thai descent. She grew up in Perth, Western Australia and at the age of 9, after her parents' divorce, moved to Brisbane, Queensland.

Career

While visiting her family in Thailand, she was asked if she would be interested in doing some modelling. She started her career in several commercials and small Thai movies before becoming a regular VJ for Channel V Thailand. Discovered by television producer Tanawat Wansom, she quickly rose to fame and became a sought-after television hostess and presenter. In 2006, she co-starred in the Thai romance comedy film The Memory.

The Amazing Race Asia 2

Taylor also participated in The Amazing Race Asia 2 with her childhood friend Natasha Monks. At the 9th leg they came in last but it was a non-elimination leg. In Leg 10, however, which was in Hungary, they came last for the second time, leading them to be the 6th eliminated pair. They finished 5th in the race.

At the Amazing Race Asia 3, the first leg was in Thailand. She was with host Allan Wu as the local greeter.

Present

Taylor made her Hollywood debut starring opposite William Hurt and Cary Elwes in the 2011 film Hellgate. Due to her exposure in the Amazing Race Asia, her face and name have become familiar in several Southeast Asian countries. She currently resides in Thailand while traveling around the region for commercials and television guest appearances. In 2009 she landed the starring role in a film starring Filipino comedian Vic Sotto in Love On Line where she plays a version of herself. She was also a guest host on Eat Bulaga! in which Sotto is a regular. She appears on the Philippine TV Sunday variety show SOP.

Personal life

Taylor married Anglo-Chinese businessman Edward Buttery in December 2010. They have a daughter: Lyla Jane Buttery (born on May 18, 2011 in UK). and in 2015 Taylor gave birth the second child name Luca Christopher Buttery in the UK.

Filmography

Movies

Television

Music videos

	 "Yah Lop Tah" by JR-Voy

	 "Sexy" by Paradox

	 "Tell Me Your Name" by Christian Bautista

	 Maak Maai by Bie The Star


