
#Article: Femi Oyeniran
#Type: regular article

Femi Oyeniran is a British actor and director, notable for his role as "Moony" in the 2006 film Kidulthood and its 2008 sequel Adulthood.

Career

Oyeniran's TV appearances include ITV’s "Golden Hour", Channel 4’s "The Ghost Squad" and BBC's "Absolutely Fabulous". His theatre debut was at the Hackney Empire in a two-hander called "Basic". He has appeared on news channels BBC News 24 and Sky News, BBC Breakfast, BBC Radio 4’s Today Programme and the BBC Asian Network to discuss youth culture in London. He is involved in an organization called Smart Justice for Young People, which looks at alternative modes of punishing petty crime. This led to him being asked to make a TV report for BBC 2’s “The Daily Politics" Programme. In July 2006, he accepted a request to speak alongside David Cameron at a Centre for Social Justice Event. The event was called "Thugs: Beyond Redemption?" at the QEII Conference Centre in Westminster. In 2009, 'Fresh Off The Boat' became Femi's first foray into film directing. The film was nominated as part of the 2009 Film London 'Best of Boroughs' awards.

He produces and hosts an online panel chat show called Cut the Chat , which provides a platform for the discussion of issues that affect young people. The show has proven really successful and there is a live format every quarter at the Camden Roundhouse

He is best known for his roles as 'Moony' in Kidulthood and its sequel Adulthood, as well as a comedy spin off Anuvahood, a film made by Adam Deacon. His first feature film It's A Lot, which he co-wrote, co-directed and co-produced was released in Spring 2013.

In addition to his work in film, television and theatre, Femi has managed and delivered a series of workshops to young people in Young Offenders Institutions.

Femi Oyeniran regularly appears on the Sky News program Sunrise, as part of the newspaper review panel. He also sat as a Commissioner on the Speaker's Commission on Digital Democracy Commission which explored modes of improving democratic participation through the use of technology. In 2014 Femi was invited to give a TEDxParliament Talk  on the theme of democracy, which was inspired by his extensive work with young offenders.

Personal life

Oyeniran, was born in Nigeria and raised in Islington, North London. He attended St Aloysius College, St Charles Catholic Sixth Form College and studied law at the London School of Economics.

In addition to acting and film making, Femi is a keen Manchester United Fan and has an interest in politics. He is a Christian and a married father of two.


