
#Article: Francis Amenu
#Type: regular article

The Very Reverend Francis Amenu is a Ghanaian metallurgical engineer who later became a priest. He is a former Moderator of the General Assembly of the Evangelical Presbyterian Church, Ghana and also a former Chairman of the Christian Council of Ghana.

Education

Rev. Amenu trained as a mining engineer at the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology School of Mines at Tarkwa in the Western Region of Ghana between 1973 and 1976. He then went into the Christian ministry. He studied at the Trinity Theological Seminary at Legon in Ghana between 1982 and 1990. He later also attended the Christian Theological Seminary, Indianapolis, United States between 1995 and 1997.

Christian ministry

He has served in various capacities in the E.P. Church between 1985 and 1999, including being the head pastor at the Accra New Town branch of the church. He was subsequently posted to London in the United Kingdom (UK) where he was the Ghanaian Minister in London and chaplain to the Ghanaian community in the United Reformed Church in the UK between 1999 and 2003. He was instrumental in starting the UK branch of the EP Church during his stay there. On his return to Ghana in the same year, he has been the District Pastor at Madina. He has also served as a lecturer at the Trinity Theological Seminary., and the new Evangelical Presbyterian University College at Ho in Ghana. Rev. Amenu was elected Moderator of the General Assembly of the E.P. Church at its 67th synod at Ho in August 2008. He unsuccessfully stood for election as the Synod Clerk of the church in 2004. He succeeded Livingstone Buama as the first Moderator of the General Assembly of the Evangelical Presbyterian Church, Ghana (E.P. Church) in 2009. His six years term ended in 2015. He was succeeded by Seth Agidi.

Francis Amenu became the Chairman of the Christian Council of Ghana in 2013. He was succeeded in April 2014 by Emmanuel Martey, who was also Moderator of the Presbyterian Church of Ghana at the time.

See also

	Evangelical Presbyterian Church, Ghana


