
#Article: Frank E. Loy
#Type: regular article

Frank E. Loy is an American diplomat, business and nonprofit executive, and attorney. He is best known for serving as United States Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs from November 2, 1998 to January 20, 2001, under President Bill Clinton. In that position, he was the chief United States negotiator for issues such as climate change and trade on genetically modified agricultural products.

He has been senior vice president for international affairs at Pan American Airways, president of the German Marshall Fund of the United States, president of the Penn Central Corporation, and an attorney with O’Melveny & Myers.

Early and personal life

Raised in Germany, Italy and Switzerland in his early years, Loy went to public schools in Los Angeles from the age of 10. He earned a B.A. degree at the University of California, Los Angeles and an LL.B. at Harvard Law School. Following law school, he served for 21 months in the United States Army.

He lives in Washington, D.C. with his wife, Dale Haven Loy, a painter. They have two children and  four grandchildren.

Private career

Loy began his career practicing corporate law in Los Angeles with the firm of O'Melveny & Myers. From 1970-1973 he served as Senior Vice President for International and Regulatory Affairs of Pan American World Airways.

He spent the years 1974 to 1979 as a partner in the turnaround firm that successfully brought the Penn Central Transportation Company out of bankruptcy. It was then the largest industrial bankruptcy in American history. In that role he served as president of the subsidiary that operated all the non-railroad businesses of the bankrupt - including an oil pipeline, an oil refinery, the Six Flags theme parks, and the Arvida Corp., a Florida land and resort development company. Loy also oversaw operations of Penn Central's New York hotels, the Roosevelt, the Biltmore, the Barclay (now the Intercontinental), and the Commodore (now the Grand Hyatt), as well as the operations of major investments, such as the Madison square Garden Corporation. When the bankruptcy terminated, he became president of the successor company, the Penn Central Corporation, listed on the New York Stock Exchange.

Government service

Loy's fist government role was as Special Assistant to the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration and director of that agency's Office of Policy Development, the FAA's economic analysis and planning shop.

He served in the Department of State under four administrations, nominated the last three times by the Presidents Carter, Clinton and Obama.

From 1965-1970 he was Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs. In that role he negotiated numerous international bilateral air transport agreements, represented the U.S. at meetings of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), and the International Maritime Organization (IMCO), and was vice-chair of the U.S. delegation to the multinational negotiations that successfully created the present structure of INTELSAT, the organization that operates the space segments of the international communications network.

From 1980 to 1981 he was Director of the State Department's Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration, with the personal rank of Ambassador.

From 1998 to 2001 he was Under Secretary for Global Affairs. His portfolio included human rights, the promotion of democracy, international criminal activity and narcotics, refugees and population affairs, and environmental matters. He served as chief U.S negotiator for climate change.

In 2011 he served as Deputy U.S Representative to the UN General Assembly.

Nonprofit work


