
#Article: Freddie Kissoon
#Type: regular article

Frederick "Freddie" Kissoon currently writes the daily "Freddie Kissoon Column" in Kaieteur News, a daily newspaper published in Guyana. Other columnists for Kaieteur News include Adam Harris and former columnist Peter Ramsaroop. Kissoon lectured at the Faculty of Social Sciences of the University of Guyana. In 2012, Frederick Kissoon became involved with a contract dispute with the University of Guyana and his contract was terminated.

Kissoon initially made his impact in the 1970s as an "anarchist freshman at UG trying to confront the establishment of Forbes Burnham", a former President of Guyana who was considered by many as a dictator. At that time he was a member of the Working People's Alliance led by Walter Rodney. Rodney was killed in a bomb explosion while running for office in 1980.

In 1988, Kissoon became a columnist for an independent Newspaper, the Catholic Standard. At that time, the Catholic Standard was the only independent newspaper in Guyana. The other newspapers were the Guyana Chronicle, a government controlled newspaper, and The Mirror, a newspaper of the then opposition party, the People's Progressive Party led by Cheddi Jagan. In the 1990s, Kissoon began writing for a new independent newspaper, the Stabroek News.

Property Tax dispute

In 2009, the Guyana Revenue Authority issued eight property tax forms to Frederick Kissoon. The reason was that he was delinquent with his Property taxes. Frederick Kissoon responded harshly to the Commissoner-General of the Guyana Revenue Authority stating that "I have worked at UG for 23 years. My wife has worked for 26 years. Together we saved our money in the bank after paying PAYE and after the bank would have paid withholding tax on the interest the bank gives. Now Khurshid Sattaur, Head of the Guyana Revenue Authority (GRA), has requested that for the past nine years I submit property tax. For those who don’t know, property tax means all assets including furniture, cars, jewellery, homes and bank account."

Libel case

Kissoon and his employers lost an appeal against an interlocutory judgment in a libel case brought by Guyanese President Jagdeo in June 2011. The defendants were ordered not to repeat the allegations in question, and to pay a $40,000 fine. The full hearing will take place on August 19, 2011.


