
#Article: Gavin McInnes
#Type: regular article

Gavin Miles McInnes (born July 17, 1970) is a Canadian writer, creative director, actor, comedian, and co-founder of Vice Media.

Life and career

McInnes was born in Hitchin, England and moved to Canada when he was four. He attended Ottawa’s Carleton University and received a degree in English in 1992.

As a teen, McInnes played in the Ottawa punk band Anal Chinook.

McInnes co-founded Vice in 1994. He left Vice in 2007 due to "creative differences."

McInnes started the website StreetCarnage.com. He also co-founded an advertising agency called Rooster where he serves as creative director. He currently writes for the web magazine Taki's Magazine. He also writes for the website VDARE.

McInnes was featured in a 2003 New York Times article about Vice magazine expressing his political views.

In an interview in the New York Press, McInnes said that he was pleased that most Williamsburg hipsters are white. He has also been quoted as saying, "I love being white and I think it's something to be very proud of ... I don't want our culture diluted. We need to close the borders now and let everyone assimilate to a Western, white, English-speaking way of life." McInnes later claimed in a letter to Gawker that the interview was done as a prank intended to ridicule, "baby boomer media like The Times." He became the focus of a letter-writing campaign by a black reader, and Vice apologized for McInnes's comments.

In 2009, McInnes convinced a journalist at The Village Voice that he had been knocked out after losing a challenge to an MMA fighter. The footage was actually an outtake from a failed TV pilot.

In 2010, McInnes convinced a journalist at Gawker that he had eaten a bowl of urine-soaked corn flakes after not winning their “Hipster of the Decade” competition. The footage was actually an outtake from a collection of comedy sketches called Gavin McInnes Is a Fucking Asshole.

In 2010, McInnes was approached by Adult Swim and asked to play the part of Mick - an anthropomorphic Scottish soccer ball - in the short-lived Aqua Teen Hunger Force spin-off Soul Quest Overdrive.  After losing a 2010 pilot contest to Cheyenne Cinnamon and the Fantabulous Unicorn of Sugar Town Candy Fudge, six episodes of Soul Quest Overdrive were ordered, with four airing in Adult Swim's 4 AM DVR Theater block on May 25, 2011 before quickly being cancelled. McInnes blames the show's cancellation on the other cast members (Kristen Schaal, David Cross, and H. Jon Benjamin) not being "as funny" as him.

In 2012, McInnes faked a serious car accident for the stand-up comedy movie The Brotherhood of the Traveling Rants. That same year, he published a book of memoirs entitled How to Piss in Public.

In October 2013, McInnes was interviewed by The Huffington Post on a panel about the meaning of masculinity, and said "people would be happier if women would stop pretending to be men", and that feminism "has made women less happy". He explained that "Women are feigning that toughness. We’ve trivialized childbirth and being domestic so much that women are forced to pretend to be men. They’re feigning this toughness, they’re miserable." A heated argument followed when University of Miami law professor Mary Anne Franks responded, and McInnes in his reply loudly called her a "fucking idiot".

In August 2014, McInnes was asked to take an indefinite leave of absence as chief creative officer of Rooster, following online publication at Thought Catalog of an essay about transphobia entitled "Transphobia is Perfectly Natural" (since masked due to "hateful or abusive content") that sparked a Boycott Rooster movement. Rooster stated, "We are extremely disappointed with his actions and have asked that he take a leave of absence while we determine the most appropriate course of action."

In June 2015, Anthony Cumia announced that McInnes will be hosting a show on his network, therefore retiring the Free Speech podcast. The show premiered on The Anthony Cumia Network on June 15 and airs Monday through Thursday at 9:30 A.M EST.

McInnes is a contributor to Canadian conservative portal The Rebel Media and a regular on Fox News' Red Eye.

Personal life

In 2005, McInnes married Manhattan-based publicist and consultant Emily Jendrisak. McInnes said in 2013 that, after being an atheist most of his life, fatherhood made him believe in God and become a pro-life Roman Catholic. He has three children.

Works

Filmography

	2006 Vice Guide to Travel — as himself

	2008 Sophie Can Walk — as himself

	2009 Asshole — as himself

	2010 A Million in the Morning — as host

	2010 Soul Quest Overdrive — as Mick

	2013 How to Be a Man — as Mark McCarthy

	2013 The Brotherhood of the Traveling Rants — as himself

Publishing history

	2003 The Vice Guide to Sex and Drugs and Rock and Roll (Warner Books)

	2004 Vice Dos and Don'ts: 10 Years of VICE Magazine's Street Fashion Critiques (Grand Central)

	2009 Street Boners: 1,764 Hipster Fashion Jokes (Grand Central)

	2012 How to Piss in Public: From Teenage Rebellion to the Hangover of Adulthood (Scribner)

	2013 The Death of Cool: From Teenage Rebellion to the Hangover of Adulthood (Paperback version of How to Piss in Public: From Teenage Rebellion to the Hangover of Adulthood) (Scribner)


