
#Article: George C. Lodge
#Type: regular article

George Cabot Lodge II (born July 7, 1927) is an American professor and former politician.

Early life

Lodge's father was a U.S. Senator from Massachusetts, U.S. Ambassador to United Nations and South Vietnam, and the Republican nominee for Vice President in 1960. His mother was Emily Esther Sears. His brother Henry Sears Lodge was born in 1930.

After finishing high school at Groton School, Lodge served in the U.S. Navy from 1945-1946 and then entered Harvard College, graduating cum laude in 1950. While at Harvard he was a member of the Krokodiloes.

Career

Lodge was a political reporter and columnist at the Boston Herald prior to entering federal civil service.

In 1954, Lodge became Director of Information at the U.S. Department of Labor. In 1958, he was appointed Assistant Secretary of Labor for International Affairs by Dwight D. Eisenhower, and was reappointed by John F. Kennedy in 1961. He was the United States Delegate to the International Labor Organization and was elected chairman of the organization's Governing Body in 1960.

He later entered politics and was the 1962 U.S. Senate candidate from Massachusetts against Ted Kennedy, marking the third time in history that the Lodges faced the Kennedys in a Massachusetts election. Previously, Lodge's father was the incumbent 1952 U.S. Senate candidate from Massachusetts against John F. Kennedy. Additionally, Lodge's patrilineal great-grandfather Henry Cabot Lodge was reelected for the same senate seat as the incumbent 1916 U.S. Senate candidate against the Kennedy brothers' maternal grandfather, John F. Fitzgerald.

In 1963, Lodge joined the Harvard Business School faculty. In 1968, he was named Associate Professor of Business Administration. In 1972, Lodge received tenure. He is currently the Jaime and Josefina Chua Tiampo Professor of Business Administration, Emeritus.

Personal life

Lodge met his wife, the late Nancy Kunhardt, daughter of author Dorothy Kunhardt, while she was studying at the Harvard Graduate School of Education and they married in 1949. They have three sons and three daughters. One of their daughters, also named Nancy, is a published children's author and professor of art history. After his wife's death in 1997, he remarried Susan Alexander Powers, who has three children from her previous marriage.


