
#Article: George Osmond
#Type: regular article

George Virl Osmond (October 13, 1917 - November 6, 2007) was the patriarch of the Osmond family.

Life and career

Osmond was born in Etna, Wyoming, the son of Agnes LaVerna (née Van Noy) and Rulon Osmond. His ancestry included English, Danish, Scottish, Scots-Irish, Swiss-German, and Dutch. Rulon died at age 24 on November 24, 1917, shortly after George was born. A devout Mormon, Osmond served two missions for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, one in Hawaii and the other in the United Kingdom.

A World War II veteran, on December 1, 1944, he married Olive May Davis. The two had nine children: Virl, Tom, Alan, Wayne, Merrill, Jay, Donny, Marie and Jimmy.

He worked in real estate, insurance and as a postmaster for the city of Ogden, Utah. He loved to sing, and he taught his children to sing barbershop harmony. The children's natural talent received public notice, which led to frequent appearances at church functions and local civil events. Osmond managed his sons careers, and gained an appearance at Disneyland in California. They caught the eye of Walt Disney, who took a personal interest in them. The boys auditioned for Andy Williams, whose father helped launch them into the national spotlight.

As his children's fortunes rose, Osmond put his career aside to focus on the family's musical interests and moved the family to California to place them closer to the heart of the entertainment industry.

In 2004, his wife Olive Osmond died shortly before the couple's 60th anniversary. In addition to their children and many grandchildren and great-grandchildren, their legacy was the Osmond Foundation, which later became the Children's Miracle Network, the largest charitable organization of its kind serving children's hospitals around the world.

On November 6, 2007, George Virl Osmond died at his home in Provo, Utah of natural causes. Affectionately known as "Father Osmond" to Osmond fans all over the world, he was buried in the East Lawn Memorial Hills Cemetery in Provo, Utah beside his wife, Olive. Along with the nine children, Osmond was survived by 55 grandchildren and 48 great-grandchildren.


