
#Article: Gloria Hunniford
#Type: regular article

Gloria Hunniford (born Mary Winifred Gloria Hunniford; 10 April 1940) is a Northern Irish television and radio presenter and singer on programmes on  BBC and ITV such as Rip Off Britain with Julia Somerville and Angela Rippon. She has been a regular reporter on This Morning and The One Show.

Early life

Hunniford was born in Portadown, County Armagh, Northern Ireland, into a Protestant family; her father was a member of the Orange Order.

Career

Television

Hunniford started as a BBC production assistant in Belfast, and a local radio broadcaster. In the 1970s and 1980s, she was the presenter of Good Evening Ulster and on the ITV Network Sunday Sunday and We Love TV.

In August 2010, Hunniford appeared as a panellist/presenter on the ITV daytime programme 3@Three.

Since 2010, Hunniford has co-presented Rip Off Britain, a consumer complaints programme on BBC Television with Angela Rippon and, for the first two series, Jennie Bond, and then, for the third series, with Julia Somerville replacing Bond. Together, the trio of Hunniford, Rippon and Somerville also presented Charlie's Consumer Angels.

In 2012, Hunniford presented the BBC One documentary series Doorstep Crime 999.

From 8 September 2014, Hunniford became a presenter on ITV chat show Loose Women. She was previously a guest panellist in 2003. From September 2014 to July 2015 Hunniford appeared on the panel in 31 episodes of the programme - three of which she anchored.

Starting on 29 September 2014, Hunniford presented the BBC One programme Home Away from Home.

Strictly Come Dancing

In 2005, Hunniford appeared in the third series of the BBC's Strictly Come Dancing, dancing with Darren Bennett and was eliminated from the competition on the third week.

	Guest appearances

Hunniford has appeared on numerous programmes including Gloria Live, Wogan, Holiday, Songs of Praise, That's Showbusiness, Kilroy and Sunday, Sunday.

In 2003, Hunniford appeared in two episodes of Loose Women as a guest panellist.

In 2008, Hunniford was a regular panellist on Through the Keyhole. On 27 September 2013, Hunniford appeared on an episode of Piers Morgan's Life Stories. On 28 January 2014, Hunniford took part in an episode of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?.

Radio

Hunniford had her own daily radio show on BBC Radio 2, starting off with the lunchtime show before moving to the early afternoon slot in 1985, where she remained for 10 years. Hunniford also hosted Sounding Brass, a music phone-in request programme with a live brass band, devised by radio producer Owen Spencer-Thomas.

Other work

Hunniford has made a health and exercise video called Fit for Life.

Personal life

Hunniford was married to Don Keating from 1970 to 1992. In September 1998, she married hairdresser Stephen Way in Tunbridge Wells, Kent.

Caron Keating

Hunniford's daughter Caron Keating (5 October 1962 - 13 April 2004) died of breast cancer in Kent. Hunniford set up a cancer charity in her daughter's name the Caron Keating Foundation. Hunniford claims that a white feather fell at her feet during the funeral of her daughter, when there was no evidence of where it came from in the surroundings. Hunniford often claims to find in unusual places such as studios etc. white feathers, which she believes are a message card from her daughter, informing her that she is in a good place.

Political views

On The Alan Titchmarsh Show on 6 May 2011, Hunniford revealed her support for David Cameron's Conservative-led coalition government, describing herself as "a bit of a David Cameron fan", although she criticised the government's decision to continue giving aid to Pakistan when it was making cuts in the UK.

In August 2014, Hunniford was one of 200 public figures who were signatories to a letter to The Guardian opposing Scottish independence in the run-up to September's referendum on that issue.

Filmography

	Television


