
#Article: Greg Brannon
#Type: regular article

Gregory J. "Greg" Brannon (born August 17, 1960) is an American physician and political activist. A native of Los Angeles, California, Brannon is a graduate of the University of Southern California and Chicago Medical School. After completing his residency, Brannon established a private obstetrics practice in Cary, North Carolina.

In 2013, Brannon announced that he would run as a Republican in the 2014 United States Senate election in North Carolina against U.S. Senator Kay Hagan. However, he lost the primary to Thom Tillis.

Education and career

Brannon received his bachelor's degree from the University of Southern California in 1982, his medical degree from Chicago Medical School in 1988, and completed his residency at University of Southern California Women's Hospital, Los Angeles, in 1992.After completing his residency, Brannon served as assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology at University of North Carolina School of Medicine, with work at Wake Area Health Education Center.In 1993, Brannon started his private practice in Cary, North Carolina. It boasts a 20,000-strong patient network and Brannon has personally delivered over 9,000 babies.

Political activism

Brannon is a Board Member of Hand of Hope, a pregnancy support group in Fuquay-Varina, North Carolina, and is a member of AAPLOG, an organization of pro-life OBGYN doctors.

2014 U.S. Senate campaign

In January 2013, Brannon announced his Senate run at an event hosted by the NC-Republican Liberty Caucus and the Eastern NC Tea Party.Brannon's campaign picked up significant momentum after speaking at the annual RedState gathering in August 2013. Brannon has twice appeared on Glenn Beck's national radio program. In addition, Brannon has also received the endorsement of U.S. Senators Rand Paul, Mike Lee, Congressman Thomas Massie, former Congressman Ron Paul, Erick Erickson, editor of RedState, Ann Coulter, and Thomas Woods.FreedomWorks, Gun Owners of America, National Association for Gun Rights, Moore Tea Citizens, Citizens for Guilford County and iCaucus have also endorsed his campaign.

However, Brannon lost the primary to Thom Tillis.

Personal life

Brannon was raised by a single mother in the suburbs of Los Angeles. He and his wife, Jody, have 7 children, three of whom are adopted.


