
#Article: Gregory W. Slayton
#Type: regular article

Gregory Winston Slayton is an American author, diplomat, professor, businessman, and philanthropist.

Born in Ohio, Slayton now resides in Hanover, New Hampshire with his wife and children. After graduating from Dartmouth College magna cum laude in 1981 Slayton was a Fulbright Scholar to Asia - earning a Masters in Asia Studies in 1982 from the University of the Philippines. He then ran regional programs in Asia, Africa and Latin America for international non-profits such as World Vision International. In 1990 he graduated with honors from the Harvard Business School. His most recent book "Be A Better Dad Today!" was published by Regal Publishing for Father's Day 2012 and sold almost 65,000 copies in 2012.

Education

Slayton was born in Ohio, U.S.A. As a child he was abandoned by his father along with his older brother. He was adopted by a Taiwanese-American family.

Slayton graduated with a degree in economics (magna cum laude) from Dartmouth College. As a Fulbright Scholar to Asia he earned a Masters in Asian Studies and then, at Harvard Business School, a Master of Business Administration degree in 1990. Both Masters degrees were conferred with honors.

Business career

In his 20s, Slayton worked in Asia, Africa, Europe and Latin America managing micro-credit and economic development programs for the poor, and learning four languages in addition to English. Slayton worked in Asia for two years running an orphanage for street children in Manila. He then worked for three years in West Africa for World Vision International where he started as a program economist and ended as a regional manager. Slayton also worked for two years in South America promoting micro-credit programs for the poor.

In his early 30s after earning his MBA from HBS, he worked for four years with McKinsey and Company in Europe, South America and the U. S., before joining Paramount Pictures as director of its Silicon Valley technology arm.

After leading a number of well-publicized high tech Silicon Valley turnarounds, he founded Slayton Capital, a private venture capital firm with offices in Northern Virginia and Silicon Valley. Slayton has served on the boards of a number of well-known high tech leaders, including the board of advisers of Google.

Slayton’s management style has been featured in a number of national publications over the years.  The Wall Street Journal of October 26, 1999, featured Slayton in "Silicon Valley Hybrid: A Boss Who Makes Others’ Ideas Pay Off." On September 27, 1999, he was pictured with other entrepreneurs on Time Magazines cover story, "GetRich.com: Inside the Secrets of the New Silicon Valley." A number of Harvard Business School case studies have been written about his work in Silicon Valley.

Slayton has also served as a National Finance Co-Chairman for a number of US Senators including Kelly Ayotte, Susan Collins, John McCain and South Dakota Republican Senator John Thune.

U.S. Consul General to Bermuda

Slayton was appointed U.S. Consul General to Bermuda by United States President George W. Bush. He was sworn in by U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice on August 15, 2005.4 The Consul General is the senior U.S. diplomat to Bermuda, a British overseas territory.

Under Slayton, the Mission developed new services including internet consular services, a Press Affairs Office and an Economic/Commercial Office.  Slayton also initiated an annual spring "State Visit" for Bermuda government officials to meet in Washington, D.C. with the U.S. President and congressional leaders.

Under Slayton’s leadership, the US Mission to Bermuda created an annual VolVis program to bring Bermudian non-profit leaders together with their US counterparts to map out a strategic plan for the island's economic future.

Slayton's service was extended twice by the Obama Administration.  He completed his term of service on August 15, 2009-exactly four years to the day from his swearing in by Condoleezza Rice. He was the youngest U.S. Principal Officer to serve in Bermuda in the modern era.

On April 21, 2010, members of the Congressional Black Caucus recognized his diplomatic service with the Distinguished Foreign Service Award in a Capitol Hill ceremony.  Slayton was the first Republican Principal Officer appointee in history to receive the award from the Congressional Black Caucus. Congresswoman Diane Watson and Congressman G.K. Butterfield, members of the Black Caucus, presented the award. Senators John McCain, Sam Brownback, and Susan Collins were also on hand.

Dr. Ewart Brown, Premier of Bermuda, credited Slayton with significantly contributing to a marked improvement in US/Bermuda relations during his tenure. He stated, "U.S./Bermuda relations are as good or better than they have been in many years-and we owe that in large part to the hard work, diplomatic skill and sheer perseverance of our friend Gregory Slayton."

Philanthropy

Slayton and his wife, Marina, founded the Slayton Family Foundation in 1999.

They also co-authored "Four Centuries of Friendship: US/Bermuda Relations from 1609-2009" in honor of the 400th anniversary of Bermuda's discovery in 1609. The book became a Bermuda best seller and is in its second printing, The Slaytons dedicated all proceeds to local Bermuda charities.

Personal life

Slayton resides in Hanover, New Hampshire with his wife, Marina, and their four children.

See also

	 Bermuda-United States relations


