
#Article: Harindarpal Banga
#Type: regular article

Harindarpal Singh Banga (Harry) is Vice-Chairman emeritus of Noble Group Limited. Noble Group Limited a global commodities trading/supply chain manager of agricultural, industrial and energy products. Noble manages a diversified portfolio of essential raw materials, integrating the sourcing, marketing, processing, financing and transportation.Harry was very much publicly in the background as Noble grew but is widely credited with being a key cornerstone of the Noble Group's success. 

As per Forbes Mar 2012 rankings, Harry has a net worth of $1.3 Billion and is ranked #45th richest person in India & #1140th richest person in the world. Known to all as "Harry", Banga is well known for remembering his modest roots and keeping his feet on the ground and being kind to all who cross his path. Many who deal with him in day-to-day matters are rather surprised to learn of his standing and wealth. Banga is also well known for his absolute loyalty to and love for his wife. He is quick to credit her for his achievements. They have always had a close partnerhsip and Mrs. Banga (Indra) is a woman of considerable intellect. 

Harindarpal Banga, has been Vice-Chairman Emeritus of Noble Group Limited since Sep 2010 & served as Vice-Chairman of the Board until Sep 2010.

Early life

A Master Mariner by trade, Harindarpal Banga has experience both in the maritime and logistics industry. Since 1979, he has worked in Gulf group in various levels of the industry (London, Europe & Hong Kong). He arrived in Hong Kong in 1984 and in 1989 he joined Noble on the establishment of Noble Chartering Limited. Banga has been a Director of Noble Group Limited since Apr 1994. 

Harindarpal Banga started his career at the maritime school Dufferin in India and earned his Master Mariner certification. In 1976 he gained command of merchant vessels at the age of 27.

Positions, Board membership and other posts held

	Vice-Chairman Emeritus of Noble Group Limited

	Served as Alternate non-executive director of Territory Resources Limited (Jul 2008 to Dec 2008).

	Associate member of The Institute of Chartered Shipbrokers.

	Member of the Singapore Institute of Directors.

	Member of the Executive Committee of the Hong Kong Shipowners Association.

	Chairman of Government Relations Committee.

	Vice-Chairman of Corporate Governance Committee.

	Vice-Chairman of Finance and Operations Committee.

	Member of Nominating Committee.

	Member of Investments & Capital Markets Committee.


