
#Article: Harry Boomer
#Type: regular article

Harry Boomer (born September 4, 19??) is a newscaster for CBS affiliate WOIO channel 19 in Cleveland, Ohio.

Bio

Boomer attended Northern Virginia Community College in Annandale, Virginia. His career began in Washington, D.C., where he was an on-air personality, talk show host and served in various management positions, including two stints as a news director.

Boomer came to Ohio in 1988 to manage and program WBXT-AM in Canton. He also worked in public television at WEAO/WNEO-TV in Kent, Ohio, as well as at WVIZ-TV in Cleveland.

While covering assignments for WOIO/WUAB on a part-time basis in the early 1990s, he was heard regularly on WCPN-90.3 FM/NPR, where he had been assistant news director. He was also a reporter, producer and major contributor to National Public Radio. Among other things, Boomer debuted a statewide news magazine program entitled Infohio for the radio station.

Boomer has served as president of the Cleveland chapter of the National Association of Black Journalists (CNABJ), and has been on the board of the Ohio Associated Press, the Citizens Committee on AIDS/HIV and the city of Cleveland Unity Day's Publicity and Education Committee. He is currently serving as a member of the North East Ohio Health Services Board of Directors and as a board member of the Ohio Center for Broadcasting. He is also a member of the Continuing Education Committee at Cleveland State University.

Personal

Boomer is active in the community, often serving as master of ceremonies at events throughout northeast Ohio. When he's not working, he enjoys talking politics and visiting friends and family around the country.

Awards

	1996 Cleveland Communicators' Awards Best Hard Single News Story ("Anti-Gingrich Protest)

	1996 Cleveland Communicators' Awards Best Public Service Program (The Subject is Sex)

	1996 Ohio Educational Telecommunications Network Program of the Year (The Subject is Sex)

	1996 Ohio Educational Telecommunications Network News and Public Affairs Program (The Subject is Sex)

	2007 inductee - Ohio Broadcasters Hall of Fame


