
#Article: Harris Faulkner
#Type: regular article

Harris Kimberly Faulkner (born October 1965) is an American newscaster and television host for Fox News Channel. Faulkner is the anchor of Fox Report and a co-anchor on Outnumbered.

Early life and education

Faulkner was born on October 13, 1965, at Fort McPherson in Atlanta, Georgia. Her father Ret. Lt. Col. Bob Harris, a United States Army aviator, was stationed at the base and had served three tours in Vietnam. Faulkner lived in different places as a child, including Stuttgart, Germany.

Faulkner attended the University of California, Santa Barbara and graduated with a B.A. in mass communications.

Career

Faulkner's start in journalism was with LA Weekly where she contributed as a freelance business writer for $50 per article. Faulkner started her television career with an internship at KCOP-TV in Los Angeles doing small tasks before she moved to Greenville, North Carolina to work as a reporter and anchor at WNCT-TV.

Faulkner worked for Kansas City's WDAF-TV between March 1992 through 2000 as an evening anchor. While in Kansas City, Faulkner was the victim of harassment and stalking by a former acquaintance who followed her from North Carolina.

Faulkner's next stop was at KSTP-TV in Minneapolis-Saint Paul where she served as part of an evening anchor team. She left the station in July 2004.

She was a correspondent for the 2005 revival of A Current Affair until its cancellation in October of the same year.

She previously presented Fox News Live headline updates during prime-time weekdays. Faulkner has been covering breaking news between 11 a.m. and 1 p.m ET. She also fills in for Shepard Smith as a substitute anchor on The Fox Report weekdays, and she anchors Fox News Extra segments that air on the international feed of Fox News. She also appears as guest-panelist on Fox News Channel's late-night satire show Red Eye w/ Greg Gutfeld. Faulkner is also a motivational speaker and works for various charitable causes.

Honors and awards

Faulkner has received six Emmy Awards including the 2005 Emmy for Best Newscaster and Best News Special.

Personal life

Faulkner married former WCCO-TV reporter Tony Berlin in 2003  and they have two daughters.

In 2015, Faulkner sued toy manufacturer Hasbro for producing a plastic toy hamster bearing her name and likeness as part of its Littlest Pet Shop line. The $5 million lawsuit cites unauthorized use of her name and persona.

Published works

	 


