
#Article: Henry Sturgis Morgan
#Type: regular article

Henry Sturgis Morgan (October 24, 1900  -  February 8, 1982) was an American banker, known for being the co-founder of Morgan Stanley.

Early life and education

He was born on October 24, 1900 in London, England to J. P. Morgan, Jr. and Jane Norton Morgan (née Grew). His father was the son of J. P. Morgan and his mother was the daughter of Boston banker and mill owner Henry Sturgis Grew.

He was educated at Groton School and graduated from Harvard University in 1923. In the same year he joined J.P. Morgan & Co. and was a partner from 1928 to 1935. He co-founded the company Morgan Stanley in 1935, together with Harold Stanley when the Glass-Steagall Act forced the separation on investment banking and commercial banking.

Family

On June 26, 1923, he married Catherine Francis Lovering Adams, a direct descendant of U.S. Presidents John Adams and John Quincy Adams. The couple had five sons; Rear Admiral Henry Sturgis Morgan Jr., USN (August 10, 1924 - May 6, 2011), Charles F. Morgan (who was a Morgan Stanley executive), Miles Morgan, John A. Morgan (founder and chairman of Morgan Joseph TriArtisan LLC), and Peter A. Morgan.

Activities and interests

Morgan was trustee, president and chairman of The Morgan Library & Museum, served on the boards of J.P. Morgan & Co., General Electric and Pullman Company, served as trustee of the Groton School and Museum of Modern Art and member of the Harvard Board of Overseers.  During World War II, Morgan was a commander in the Naval Reserve and served as an OSS Agent. 

Inheritance

At the death of his father in 1943, he and his brother Junius Spencer Morgan III inherited the estate. Morgan owned a 448 acre estate, which is located at Eaton's Neck Road, Eatons Neck, New York, United States.

Death

He died on February 8, 1982 in Manhattan, New York City at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.

Memberships

Like his father, brother and grandfather he was the Commodore of New York Yacht Club where he served as chairman of its America's Cup Committee. He was also Vice President of International Yacht Racing Union. He was a member of Bohemian Grove, the Council on Foreign Relations, Community Service Society of New York, the Pilgrims Society and the Roxburghe Club.  In politics he was a Republican.

Honors

Morgan was inducted into the America's Cup Hall of Fame in 2001.


