
#Article: Günther Oettinger
#Type: regular article

Günther Hermann Oettinger (born 15 October 1953) is a German politician and a member of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU).

Oettinger was appointed European Commissioner for Energy in the European Commission on 10 February 2010 (since 1 July 2014 also Vice President of the Barroso II commission) and is affiliated with the European People's Party (EPP). He served as Minister-President of the Federal State of Baden-Württemberg between 2005 and 2010 and chairman of the CDU Baden-Württemberg from 2005 until 2010.

Early life and education

Oettinger studied Law and Economics at the University of Tübingen. He worked in an accounting and tax consulting business, before being licensed in 1984 to practice law and worked in this sector until 1988.

Political career

Oettinger embarked in politics as a member of the Junge Union, the youth organisation of the CDU; he was chairman of the organization in Baden-Württemberg from 1983 to 1989. From 2001 to 2005 he served as Chairman of the CDU Party in Nordwürttemberg (North Württemberg), and has also been CDU Chairman of the Federal Committee for Media Politics.Oettinger was elected as a Member of the State Parliament (Landtag) of Baden-Württemberg in 1984. From 1991 to 2005 he was Leader of the CDU Parliamentary Group.

Minister President of Baden-Württemberg, 2004-10

In October 2004 the Minister President of Baden-Württemberg Erwin Teufel announced that he was to step down as Minister President and Chairman of the Baden-Württemberg CDU, effective 19 April 2005. Oettinger was elected as his successor by CDU internal party pre-elections. His referendum win - with 60.6 percent of the vote versus 39.4 percent for state Education Minister Annette Schavan - was widely seen at the time as a defeat for Teufel, who had promoted Schavan as his preferred successor.

On 29 April 2005, Oettinger became Chairman of the CDU in Baden-Württemberg, eight days after succeeding Teufel as Minister President. In 2006 the CDU held onto their majority in the Baden-Württemberg state election; Oettinger was re-elected Minister President. Oettinger headed a coalition regional government comprising CDU and FDP members.

Between 2007 and 2009, Oettinger served as co-chair (alongside Peter Struck) of the Second Commission on the modernization of the federal state (Föderalismuskommission II), which had been established to reform the division of powers between federal and state authorities in Germany.

Following the 2009 federal elections, Oettinger was part of the CDU/CSU team in the negotiations with the FDP on a coalition agreement; he joined the working group on economic affairs and energy policy, led by Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg and Rainer Brüderle. On 24 October 2009, Angela Merkel's new centre-right coalition government chose Oettinger to be a Commissioner of the European Commission. He took office on 10 February 2010, the same day he stepped down as Minister President of Baden-Württemberg.

In a leaked diplomatic cable from the United States Embassy entitled "Lame Duck German Governor Kicked Upstairs as New Energy Commissioner in Brussels," U.S. Deputy Chief of Mission in Germany, Greg Delawie notes: "Chancellor Angela Merkel nominated Baden-Wuerttemberg (BW) Minister President Guenther Oettinger as EU Energy Commissioner primarily to remove an unloved lame duck from an important CDU bastion". Delawie's cable further states: "Oettinger is noted for a lackluster public speaking-style, and some commentators have asserted that Merkel, who has often stood out at EU meetings, wanted to appoint a German Commissioner who would not outshine her!"

Vice-President of the European Commission in charge of Energy, 2010-2014

In the Second Barroso Commission, Oettinger was allocated the Energy portfolio, which had just grown in importance after the Lisbon Treaty gave the EU complete authority in the area.

At his confirmation hearing before the European Parliament in 2010, Oettinger pledged to enforce the principle of solidarity on energy policy as enshrined in the EU's Lisbon Treaty so that no member state could be left disadvantaged. He struck a chord with parliamentarians by basing his security of supply strategy equally on diversifying gas transportation routes from third countries and promoting indigenous renewable energy. Asked about his stance on nuclear energy Oettinger said that although his country Germany sees nuclear as a bridging technology, he had no reservations against France's plans to build more nuclear capacity nor Austria's decision to abandon the technology altogether.

The first phase of Oettinger’s term was dominated by the Nabucco pipeline debate, his many trips to Azerbaijan and the Caspian region as well as his negotiations with Russian energy company Gazprom. Oettinger lobbied both for the Nabucco pipeline and the Trans Adriatic Pipeline, arguing they will be needed in the medium-term as routes to help secure European gas supply. The second phase began with the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster in 2011 and the resulting energy transition in Germany. Oettinger advised that there should be no new taxes on energy within the EU, and current taxes should not be raised, if prices are to be kept competitive with rivals fuelled by cheaper shale gas in the US.

Throughout his time in office, Oettinger regularly made headlines for his comments on constituent EU member countries’ economic situations. In remarks published by German media in May 2013, he expressed doubts about France’s economic recovery and said "too many in Europe still believe that everything will be fine." France, he said, "is completely unprepared to do what’s necessary," while Italy, Bulgaria and Romania "are essentially ungovernable." Oettinger has also repeatedly been in conflict with the German government. In an interview with Die Welt in 2014, he criticized the German Federal Government’s plan to allow longer-serving employees to retire at the age of 63 for the message this sent to cash-strapped peripheral eurozone states like Greece, Spain and Portugal.

In mid-2014, Oettinger led high-level talks in order to facilitate a deal under which Ukraine would pay Russia $3.1 billion amid a dispute over unpaid Russian gas bills and Russia would deliver the gas Ukraine needs for the winter.

Commissioner for Digital Economy and Society, 2014-present

Following the 2014 European elections, both governing parties in Germany - the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and the Social Democratic Party (SPD) - backed Oettinger to remain as the German EU Commissioner in the incoming European Commission. At first, Oettinger was widely considered to be a leading candidate to take the position of European Commissioner for Trade, as German Chancellor Angela Merkel was said to consider the negotiations over the controversial TTIP to be one of the most important projects for growth in this legislative term. Instead, Jean-Claude Juncker, President-elect of the European Commission, nominated Oettinger as Commissioner for Digital Economy and Society.

Data protection

In a nod to European concerns over data protection, Oettinger has expressed his support to stiffer rules currently under consideration that would provide Europeans with a greater say over how their online data is used by the likes of Google, Facebook and other internet companies. He also supports the liberal principle known as the "right to be forgotten", in which people have the right to ask that links to information about themselves be removed from internet searches. Pushing for a credible global common understanding on confidential and personal information of citizens around the world, Oettinger has called for the establishment of a UN agency for data protection and data security.

Economic policy

In an op-ed published in both the Financial Times and Les Échos in November 2014, Oettinger questioned whether President François Hollande has the "willingness to act" to reform the French economy and said the Commission should insist France undertake "concrete and quantifiable measures coupled with precise deadlines" as a condition for a fresh deficit extension; in response, members of the French Socialists called for Oettinger to resign.

Controversies

Eulogy controversy

On 11 April 2007, Oettinger gave a controversial eulogy on one of his predecessors as Minister President of Baden-Württemberg, Hans Filbinger, who was forced to resign in 1978 after allegations surfaced about his role as a navy lawyer and judge during the Second World War, and who died on 1 April at the age of 93.

In his speech at the memorial service at Freiburg, Oettinger described Filbinger as "not a National-Socialist" but as "an opponent of the Nazi régime", who "could flee the constraints of the régime as little as million others". Referring to Filbinger's role as a naval judge, Oettinger pointed out that no lives were taken by Filbinger's verdicts and that he did not wield the power and freedom suggested by his critics. Oettinger was subsequently accused by politicians and the media of playing down the significance of the Nazi dictatorship. German Chancellor Angela Merkel reacted by publicly admonishing him, stating that she would have preferred for "the critical questions" not to be raised. Oettinger was also criticized by opposition politicians and the Central Council of Jews in Germany; some critics even called for his dismissal.

Oettinger at first defended his speech, adding that he regretted any "misunderstanding" over his eulogy although he did not retract his comments about Filbinger's past. Later however, on 16 April, he distanced himself from his comments.

Flag controversy

Oettinger suggested that heavily in debted countries should fly their flag at half-mast over EU buildings. As a result, several MEPs wrote a letter of protest to EU Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso, demanding his apology or resignation. Oettinger backed down, saying he did not support the idea of flying flags at half-mast.

Energy subsidies controversy

In October 2013, Oettinger altered an official report of the European Commission to hide the fact that conventional and nuclear energies are both more heavily subsidized than renewables. He is convinced that renewables are too expensive and a burden for the economy. To prove his point he had ordered a detailed listing in the Report on Subsidies and Costs of EU Energy 2013. However, in short notice before the report being published, he had the numbers regarding nuclear energy (€ 35bn / a) and fossil fuels (€ 66bn / a) erased, as they showed that each is more heavily subsidized than renewables at € 30bn / a. In the final and official report only the numbers for renewables are shown.

Other activities

	 Friends of the Dessau-Wörlitz Garden Realm, Member of the Board of Trustees

	 Initiative D21, Member of the Advisory Board

	 Schule Schloss Salem, Member of the Board of Trustees

	 Medien- und Filmgesellschaft Baden-Württemberg (MFG), Member of the Supervisory Board (-2005)

Personal life

Oettinger married Inken Stange in 1994, by whom he has one son. On 9 December 2007, Oettinger and Inken announced that they were separated. Three days later, Oettinger's wife was reported to have already been in a relationship for 9 months with Otmar Westerfellhaus, Managing Director of the Porsche car-manufacturing subsidiary in Mannheim.

Since separating from his wife, Oettinger's liaison with Friederike Beyer, a PR events organiser from Hamburg, who is 25 years his junior, has enjoyed wide coverage in the German press.

Honours

	  Grand Cross (1st Class), Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany 

	  Grand Cross, Order for Merits to Lithuania 


