
#Article: Michelle Gomez
#Type: regular article

Michelle Gomez (born 21 April 1966) is a Scottish actress. She is best known for her comedy roles in Green Wing, The Book Group and Bad Education, and for playing Missy, a female incarnation of the Master, in the British television sci-fi series Doctor Who.

Early life

Gomez was born in Glasgow. Her father, originally from Montserrat, was a photographer, while her mother ran a modelling agency. From the moment she saw a production of Kiss Me, Kate at the age of seven, Gomez wanted to be an actress, which her parents encouraged. She attended Shawlands Academy from 1978 to 1983 and trained at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama.

Career

Gomez's first major role was in The Acid House, based on three Irvine Welsh short stories. She went on to star in the cult Channel 4 comedy drama The Book Group before landing her role as staff liaison officer Sue White in the Channel 4 comedy Green Wing. She played Michelle in Carrie and Barry for the BBC (which coincidentally debuted the same night as Green Wing), and starred as PC Sally Bobbins in the BBC 2 sitcom Feel the Force. She appeared in Gunslinger's Revenge.

In 2005, Gomez appeared in the film Chromophobia. In 2006, she starred in the film The Good Housekeeping Guide. In 2007 she starred in a drama by Irvine Welsh and Dean Cavanagh called Wedding Belles, and starred in Boeing-Boeing at the Comedy Theatre in London. Also in 2007, she guest-starred in the Doctor Who audio play Valhalla. In 2008 she joined the Royal Shakespeare Company, and performed as Kate in The Taming of the Shrew at the Courtyard Theatre and the Novello Theatre.

In 2012, Gomez starred in the British film, The Wedding Video, portraying the psychologically unstable wedding planner. In the same year, she appeared in the British comedy series Bad Education, portraying the deputy-head Isobel Pickwell, which returned for a second series in 2013. In 2014, she began producing comedy sketches as "Heather" an agony aunt for YouTube channel Wildseed Studios.

She guest starred in the eighth series of Doctor Who, as a character initially called the "Gatekeeper of the Nethersphere". Despite initial belief she would only be appearing in the series finale, Gomez made surprise cameo appearances in some episodes in the eighth series, and appeared in the finale two-parter. She portrayed Missy, who was revealed to be a new female incarnation of the Doctor's longstanding nemesis, the Master, in the penultimate episode "Dark Water". Gomez returned in the 2-part opening story of Series 9, "The Magician's Apprentice" / "The Witch's Familiar" broadcast in September 2015.

Personal life

Gomez has been married to actor Jack Davenport since 1 May 2000. She gave birth to their son, Harry, in early 2010.

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games


