
#Article: Yaron London
#Type: regular article

Yaron London (ירון לונדון; born 24 August 1940) is an Israeli media personality, journalist, actor and songwriter.

Biography

Yaron London was born in Tel Aviv. His father was an actor, Bezalel London. 

London studied at Herzliya Hebrew High School and the agricultural boarding school HaKfar HaYarok. In 1961, after serving in the IDF, he moved to Jerusalem to study graphics at Bezalel Academy of Art and Design.

He lives in Afeka, Tel Aviv. He was married to Nira, with whom he has three children. In 2005, Nira suffered a stroke.She died in February 2010. 

Media career

In 1962, during his studies, he began working for Kol Yisrael as a news announcer. He hosted HaYom HaZeh ("This day"), the first current affairs program in Israeli electronic media.

In 1969 he was sent by the Israel Broadcasting Authority to Paris as its correspondent in Western Europe. In the early 1970s he returned to Israel and joined Channel One as a talk show host, and later became head of the drama department. He also directed several documentaries. 

In 1988 he left the television to become a correspondent and publicist in Yediot Aharonot. In 1990 he returned to Channel One, and co-hosted the children's show "Mesibat Gan" ("Garden Party") with Rivka Michaeli. In 1994, soon after the establishment of Channel Two, he made several documentaries for Keshet, including "The Fat Man with the Sony", a month-long travelogue in South East Asia.

In 2003 he began co-hosting the daily current affairs program "London & Kirschenbaum" with Moti Kirschenbaum (whom he had met working for Channel One) on Channel Ten. In 2008, they both signed for two more years with the Channel Ten. His other activities included illustrating a poetry book in 1962, and writing several popular tunes, including one for HaGashash HaHiver. His songs were recently published in a compilation album. In 1979 he appeared in the film Schlager starring Hagashash HaHiver members and in 1983 he starred in Yitzhak Yeshurun's A Married Couple, as well as several children tapes. In 2008 he made a series titled "The scenario", which dramatizes potential disasters that might strike Israel.

Awards and recognition

In December 2007 he was awarded the Sokolow Prize for lifetime achievement.

In December 2010, London was awarded the Eliav-Sartawi Award for Middle Eastern Journalism.

See also

	Television in Israel

	Hasamba

	London at Kirschenbaum


