
#Article: Horrie Knight
#Type: regular article

Horace Raymond Knight OAM (1 December 1915 - 6 June 1990) was a South Australian-born business man (independent grocer) & philanthropist.

Knight spent much of his early life in Broken Hill, New South Wales. During World War II he served in the Australian Army 2/8th Field Ambulance  and was a Rat of Tobruk.

On Knight's return, he began building a chain of self-service supermarkets starting in Prospect and subsequently in Salisbury and Elizabeth branded Foodland, Cheap Foods, or Half Case.

Horrie was well known for providing employment and generally being active in the community as he devoted a lot of time & money to local charitable organisations, namely Rotary. He became the president of the Rotary Club of Elizabeth in (1974/75)  and a Paul Harris Fellow in 1979. In 1976 he was Elizabeth's first Citizen of the Year. In addition to his work with Rotary, Horrie was also a founding member of the Elizabeth & Districts Foundation, now known as the United Way (North), which is the largest non-government fund raising/giving organisation in South Australia 

He was awarded the Medal of the Order of Australia in 1990 for his lifelong commitment to charitable work in the northern suburbs of Adelaide, South Australia, but died before the presentation ceremony; (accepted posthumously by his wife).

Following his death, the H.R. Knight Memorial Trust was established to award individuals or groups who have made an outstanding achievement in the areas of education, arts, literature, music, athletics, and healthy amateur sport. It was administered by the Rotary Club of Elizabeth and until its closure in 2010, benefited many young people in the local area.

More recently a reserve in Blakeview, was named after Knight in 2004. The Horrie Knight Reserve can be found off Balmoral cct & Cherrytree cr in Blakeview.

Knight was married at the Adelaide suburb of Enfield on 16 November 1940 to Laurel Mary Hall (25 October 1918 - 25 September 2010) and their marriage produced three children: David (February 1945-), Stephen (November 1947-), Penelope (December 1951-).


