
#Article: Ian Turpie
#Type: regular article

Ian Bruce Turpie (6 November 1943 - 11 March 2012) was an Australian actor and television presenter, best known for hosting the Australia version of the long-running game show The New Price Is Right, as well as playing Keith Warne on Swift and Shift Couriers and Wazza on Housos.

Career

Early life

Born in Melbourne in 1943, Turpie began his entertainment career at the age of 10, when he was accepted at the Hector Crawford Drama School and gained recognition as a juvenile actor working in radio and theatre. He starred in a number of radio programmes alongside Sir Robert Helpmann and June Bronhill, and appeared in the Hector Crawford radio series D24, recorded at the 3DB studios in Melbourne and broadcast nationally over the Major Broadcasting Network.

During his teens, he discovered a passion for music and focused on playing guitar, songwriting and singing. By the age of 16, Turpie was a seasoned radio and stage performer, touring Australia in such hits as Peter Pan, Auntie Mame and Bye Bye Birdie, and appearing in several National Theatre productions including Shakespeares Macbeth.

Television and personal life

Television soon beckoned; in 1964, Turpie played a student shot dead in a mock bank robbery in the opening scene to the debut episode of the iconic Crawford police series Homicide, having earlier appeared in a featured guest role in an episode of the courtroom drama Consider Your Verdict.

Turpie made regular appearances on Bandstand, Time For Terry and The Graham Kennedy Show. Turpie's talents as musician and compere were recognised at 21, when he replaced Johnny O'Keefe for a stint as national television compere on Sing Sing Sing. He was subsequently chosen to host the top-rating teenage variety show The Go!! Show from mid 1965 until the end of 1966. He was an early boyfriend of Olivia Newton-John, with whom he had starred in the 1965 Australian musical telefilm Funny Things Happen Down Under, Newton-John's debut performance.

In the 1970s, Turpie moved to Sydney to work the club circuit, and continued to make guest appearances on numerous television shows including The Mike Walsh Show, The Bert Newton Show, A Guy Called Athol and the ABC variety series Follies.

In the 1980s, Turpie became a nationwide figure as host of the highly successful, frenzied game show The New Price Is Right. This was followed by other game shows including Press Your Luck and Supermarket Sweep.

In the 1990s, Ian developed cult status following a regular four-year stint as Club President on Roy & HG's Club Buggery. Known as the "Giant of the G Chord", he performed renditions of such classics as Nirvana's Smells Like Teen Spirit, and, complete with suspenders, The Rocky Horror Picture Show's Time Warp. Less serious Club Buggery appearances in Turps about the House, Captain Ajax and Sam Stain showcased his comedic talents, as did a semi-regular role as cabaret-style singer Rolan Fields in drama series Always Greener (2001-03). From 2000 he acted in Pizza and had a lead role in Housos as Wazza Jones, who was also the program's narrator. He also played the role of Depot Manager Keith Warne in Swift and Shift Couriers seasons one and two.

In 2004 the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) took legal action against Turpie for misleading and deceptive conduct in breach of the Trade Practices Act. The ACCC alleged that Turpie had made false claims (that he was losing his sexual potency) in advertisements for an erectile dysfunction treatment spray from the Australian Medical Institute.

In 2005 Turpie pleaded guilty to drink driving after driving in Manly, New South Wales, with a blood alcohol level of 0.08 (the legal limit in the state is 0.05). He was fined $867 and had his drivers licence suspended for six months; however this was overturned on appeal. After taking into account Turpie's charity work and his need to drive to work, Judge Reg Blanch ordered that no conviction be recorded. Turpie told reporters he was sorry for doing a "stupid thing".

Death

On 18 February 2011 it was announced that Turpie, a heavy smoker had been diagnosed with cancer. He died on 11 March 2012, aged 68.

Turpie was married to his wife Jan for 35 years and had three children and three grandchildren.

Awards

	Mo Award Hall of Fame (2011) 

	Penguin Award, Best Light Entertainment, The New Price Is Right (1985)

	Logie Award, Most Popular Western Australia Show, Turpie Tonight (1983)

	Penguin Award, Best Light Entertainment, The New Price Is Right (1982)

Filmography

	Funny Things Happen Down Under, as Lennie (1965)

	Heaven's Burning, cameo as used car salesman (1997)

	All the Way (1998)

	Somewhere in the Darkness, as the Weatherman (1998)

	Kissing Kimberley Cooper (Tropfest film)

TV

Acting

	Consider Your Verdict (1964) 1 episode

	Homicide (1964) 1 episode

	The Magic Boomerang (1965) 1 episode

	Always Greener as Rolan Fields (2002-2003) 6 episodes

	Swift and Shift Couriers as Keith Warne (2008, 2011) 19 episodes

	Double the Fist as M.C (2008) 1 episode

	Housos as Wazza (2011)

Host regular

	Club Buggery, ABC (1996-1997)

	The Go!! Show

	Sing, Sing, Sing (replacing Johnny O'Keefe)

	Surprise, Surprise - co-host with Tommy Hanlon Jr

	Supermarket Sweep, Nine Network (1992-1994)

	Time for Terry co-host with Terry O'Neill

	Turpie Tonight

	The Newlyweds Game, Network Ten (1968), Nine Network (1987)

	The New Price Is Right (1981-1986)

	The Price Is Right (1989)

	Press Your Luck, Seven Network (1987-1988)

Guest appearances

	The Young Entertainers

	This is your Life (with Mike Munro)

	Love is in the Air

	Long Way to the Top

	All the Way

	Theatre Royal

	Revue 7

	TeenTime

	Kommotion

	Bandstand (Brian Henderson)

	Steve Vizard Tonight

	Bert Newton Show

	Blankety Blanks (Graham Kennedy)

	Family Feud (Rob Brough)

	The Fat (Tony Squires)

	Mike Walsh Show

	Don Lane Show

	Hey Hey It's Saturday (Daryl Somers)

	Celebrity Who Wants to be a Millionaire?

	Celebrity Wheel of Fortune

	Penthouse Club (Mary Hardy)

	Bandstand

	A Guy Called Athol

	ABC Follies

	The Melbourne Show

	Supermarket Sweep

	Spicks & Specks

	We'll Call You

Theatre

	Peter Pan, Princess Theatre

	Nude with Violin (with Sir Robert Helpmann), Comedy Theatre

	Auntie Mame (with Shirl Conway), Princess Theatre

	MacBeth, National Theatre

	Bye Bye Birdie, Her Majesty's Theatre

	Rock Opera — Hero, Seymour Centre (with Graham Bond)

	Rock Opera — Jesus Christ Superstar (with Marcia Hines & John English), St George Leagues Club

	Bull and Bush Theatre Restaurant Show Bubble & Squeak (with Noel Ferrier & Jill Perryman)

Radio

	appeared in some episodes of the Crawford Productions' D24, broadcast nationally on the Major Broadcasting Network

	ABC Play "Five Find Outers"

	Evening Host 2CH

Discography

	Turps is the Talk of the Town

	Decimal point (1967) (For the decimalisation of New Zealand)

Charity work

Turpie was involved with the following charities: Australia Day ambassador (since 1995), Make a Wish Foundation, Merry Makers, Sunnyfield Association, Meningococcal Association, Children with Cancer, Lifeforce, Sydney Children's Hospital (Celebrity Golf Days), Alzheimer's Australia NSW and Rotary Club.


