
#Article: Roko Belic
#Type: regular article

Roko Belić is an American film producer and director. Belic's directorial debut, Genghis Blues, was nominated for an Academy Award for best documentary feature.

Early life and education

Belic was born to Czechoslovakian and Yugoslavian parents, Danica and Nenad Belic. During his childhood, his mother used a wrench to lock a broken dial on the family TV to the local PBS channel. His first filmmaking experience was in third grade with his brother, Adrian, when a friend, Christopher Nolan, borrowed a super-8 movie camera from his parents. Belic grew up in Chicago in suburban Illinois and attended Evanston Township High School. Belic later attended the University of California, Santa Barbara.

Career

For his first feature, Belic was inspired by a story unfolding in the little-known Siberian republic of Tuva. Trusting his intuition, Belic purchased two cameras on credit and flew with his brother to Tuva to create the documentary feature, Genghis Blues (1999). Belic’s landmark film received an Academy Award nomination for best documentary feature and won over 70 international film festival awards including the Sundance Audience Award.

Continuing with his passion of global cinematic journeys, Belic associate produced Beyond the Call (2006), following three American soldiers-turned-humanitarians, traveling to war zones around the world delivering life-saving aid. The following year, Belic co-produced and shot the award-winning Indestructible (2007), filmed in locations from China to Israel, following one man’s search for a cure for his terminal illness.

In 2010, Belic directed the documentary Dreams: Cinema Of The Subconscious, included on the Inception (2010) Blu-ray. Following its success, he directed The Batmobile, released on The Dark Knight Rises (2012) Blu-ray.

Most recently, Belic teamed up with director Tom Shadyac (Bruce Almighty, Liar Liar, The Nutty Professor), who executive produced, to make the feature documentary Happy (2012). Directed, written, and co-produced by Belic, Happy combines powerful human stories with cutting-edge science to give audiences a deeper understanding of our most desired emotion. Happy won numerous awards and screened in 70 countries. It was the #1 documentary on iTunes for over nine weeks and achieved "All-Time Bestseller" status.

Personal life

Belic currently resides in Malibu, California with his longtime girlfriend, Gael Firth, and their daughter, Viva Paradise Firth Belic.

Belic's step-mother, Ellen Stone Belic, is the daughter of Jerome H. Stone, the founder of the Alzheimer's Association and of J. H. Stone & Sons.  His father, Nenad, was a retired cardiologist who died while attempting to row solo across the Atlantic Ocean.

Filmography

Director

	 Genghis Blues (1999)

	 Happy (2011)

	 Dreams (2010)

	 The Batmobile (2012)

Producer

	 Genghis Blues (1999) (executive producer) (producer)

	 Homecoming (2004) (field producer)

	 Beyond the Call (2006) (co-producer)

	 Indestructible (2007) (co-producer)

Cinematographer

	 Genghis Blues (1999)

	 Indestructible (2007)

	 I Am (2010)

	 Happy (2011)

Actor

	 Totally Fucked Up (1993)

	 Fame Whore (1997)


