
#Article: Pawan Kalyan
#Type: regular article

Pawan Kalyan is an Indian film actor, director, screenwriter, stunt coordinator, writer, and politician. His film works are predominantly in Telugu cinema. He is the younger brother of actor turned politician Chiranjeevi. Kalyan made his acting debut in 1996 Telugu film Akkada Ammayi Ikkada Abbayi. In 1998, he starred in Tholi Prema which won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Telugu for that year. In 2015, he enacted Lord Krishna in the sleeper hit Gopala Gopala.

He is known for his works in films Gokulamlo Seetha, Suswagatham, Thammudu, Badri, Kushi, Jalsa, Gabbar Singh for which he received the Filmfare Award for Best Actor - Telugu, and Attarintiki Daredi which became the highest grossing Telugu film of all time. He was listed 26th in the Forbes India list of top 100 Celebrities of 2013. As of 2014, he holds a net worth of .

In March 2014, he ventured into politics, founding the Jana Sena Party. During that period, Pawan Kalyan was listed by google as the most searched Indian celebrity politician on Google search.

Personal life

Kalyan was born to Konidela Venkat Rao and Anjana Devi. He is the younger brother of Chiranjeevi and Nagendra Babu. He started using the name "Pawan" after a martial arts presentation he organized to demonstrate his training. He holds a black belt in karate.

Pawan Kalyan has been married three times: to Nandini from 1997 to 2007, to Renu Desai from 2009 to 2012 and to Anna Lezhneva since 2013. He has a son, Akira, and a daughter, Aadhya, with Renu Desai.

Film career

Pawan Kalyan entered the Telugu movie industry with the 1996 film Akkada Ammayi Ikkada Abbayi as Kalyan Kumar. His second movie was Gokulamlo Seetha in 1997, which was a remake of the 1996 Tamil film Gokulathil Seethai. This movie was directed by Muthyala Subbaiah and produced by G.V.G. Raju. In 1997, he also appeared in Suswagatham, a remake of 1997 Tamil film Love Today.

In 1998, Tholi Prema was released and won a National Award and six Nandi Awards. After Tholi Prema, Pawan acted in Thammudu, playing the role of a kick boxer. Thammudu was released on 15 July 1999 and was written and directed by P. A. Arun Prasad. Next he acted in Puri Jagannadh's first directorial venture Badri. In 2001, he was the brand ambassador for Pepsi at the time his brother Chiranjeevi was promoting Coca-Cola.

In 2001, Pawan Kalyan acted in the film Kushi. The film was released on 27 April 2001 and was directed by S. J. Surya.Next film Johnny, written and directed by Kalyan, released on 26 April 2003. Kalyan also starred in the film, along with Renu Desai. In 2004, his film Gudumba Shankar was released. The film was directed by Veera Shankar and produced by Pawan's brother Nagendra Babu on Anjana Productions banner. The film's script and screenplay were written by Kalyan and also choreographed three songs in this film and actions scenes were conceived and choreographed by him.

In 2005, the film Balu ABCDEFG, directed by A. Karunakaran was released. This was A. Karunakaran's second film with Pawan Kalyan after Tholi Prema. This film was produced by C. Ashwini Dutt under Vyjayanthi Movies banner. In 2006, Bangaram directed by Tamil director Dharani was released. Later that year, he appeared in Annavaram directed by Bhimaneni Srinivasa Rao. Asin, and Sandhya were cast alongside Pawan in the film and the film was produced under Supergood Films. The film was released on 29 December 2006 and collected 230 million in 3 weeks and  in 70 Days. The film was a remake of the Tamil film Thirupaachi. Pawan Kalyan also choreographed a song "Neevalle Neevalle" in this film.

In 2008, Jalsa directed by Trivikram Srinivas and produced by Allu Aravind was released.

Puli was written and directed by S. J. Surya and released in 2010. An official announcement was made in the same year that Pawan Kalyan was going to play a small role in a movie about Jesus Christ directed by Singeetam Srinivasa Rao .

In 2011, he appeared in Teen Maar, a remake of Love Aaj Kal, directed by Jayanth C. Paranjee. In 2011, he also appeared in Vishnuvardhan's gangster film Panjaa.

In 2012, Pawan Kalyan appeared in Gabbar Singh, a remake of Dabangg, directed by Harish Shankar. The film successfully completed 100 days and stood as 2nd highest grossing film of all time in Tollywood. After this film he worked in Puri Jagannadh's Cameraman Ganga Tho Rambabu.

In 2013 he then appeared in Trivikram Srinivas's Attharintiki Daaredhi. The film, released on 27 September 2013. This film faced problems with piracy as half of the movie got leaked in the internet prior to its release. In spite of piracy Attharintiki Daaredhi was a block buster hit in 2013.The movie completed 100 days in 33 theaters and currently holds the record of higgest grossing films of all time in Tollywood surpassing the previous record of Maga Dheera. Kalyan's next movie is a remake of Hindi Movie Oh My God. The movie shooting was expected to start shooting on 19 May but was delayed because of various reasons like finding a heroine. The movie was named Gopala Gopala with shooting starting on 9 June. The movie was released on 10 January 2015 and got positive response.

In 2014, a STAR India survey ranked Pawan Kalyan as one of Top 5 Heroes of India.

For a complete list of Pawan Kalyan's movies - Pawan Kalyan filmography

Charitable works

In 2012, he donated Rs 500,000 to support Olympic sports shooter Rekha Chalichemala. In 2013 he reportedly donated Rs 2 million to the Natural Calamity Management Fund for those impacted by the floods at Uttarakhand.

On 14 October 2014 he announced Rs. 5 million to the Chief Minister's relief fund for taking up relief operations in the aftermath of cyclone Hudhud in Andhra Pradesh.

Political career

Pawan Kalyan founded a political party called Jana Sena on 14 March 2014. He met with then BJP Prime ministerial candidate Narendra Modi to discuss about the issues related to both the Telugu states and extended his support. Pawan Kalyan campaigned extensively for Telugu Desam Party and BJP combine in Andhra and Telangana. His rallies drew what the Deccan-Journal called "huge crowds" in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.

Brand Endorsements

In April, 2001 Pawan endorsed a cola company. He was the brand ambassador for Pepsi cool drink in Andhra Pradesh.Later he got many endorsements but he didn't show any interest till now.

Awards and nominations


