
#Article: Jay Carney
#Type: regular article

James "Jay" Carney (born May 22, 1965) was the 29th White House Press Secretary. He was the second person to serve in the position during the presidency of Barack Obama, having replaced Robert Gibbs. Prior to his appointment as press secretary he was director of communications for Vice President Joe Biden. Carney previously served as Washington Bureau Chief for Time magazine, a post he held from September 2005 until December 2008, and as a regular contributor in the "roundtable" segment of ABC News' This Week with George Stephanopoulos. President Obama announced he had accepted Carney's resignation as press secretary on May 30, 2014.

Early life and education

Carney was raised in Northern Virginia, attended high school at The Lawrenceville School in New Jersey, and earned a bachelor's degree cum laude in Russian and Eastern European Studies from Yale University in 1987.

Journalism career

After being hired as a reporter for The Miami Herald in 1987, Carney joined Time magazine as its Miami Bureau Chief in 1989. Carney worked as a correspondent in Times Moscow Bureau for three years, covering the collapse of the U.S.S.R.. He came to Washington in 1993 to report on the Bill Clinton White House.

He has written and reported about the presidency of George W. Bush, and was one of a handful of reporters who were aboard Air Force One with President Bush on September 11, 2001. Carney later won the 2003 Gerald R. Ford Prize for Distinguished Reporting on the Presidency.

Carney was Times Washington Bureau Deputy Chief from 2003 to 2005, and Chief from September 2005 until December 2008. He was assigned to the magazines Washington Bureau in that tenure while also being able to write about politics and national affairs.

Press Secretary

On December 15, 2008, Carney went from the private sector to public payroll as Director of Communications to Vice President-elect Joe Biden.

On January 27, 2011, Carney was selected to become the Obama administration's second White House Press Secretary. He was named the successor to previous White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs by White House Chief of Staff, William Daley. Carney was one of fourteen White House appointees announced by Daley on that day.

As of June 21, 2013, Yahoo News reported that Carney had somehow dodged a question approximately 9,486 times, including responding in some variation of "I don't know" over 1,900 times since his first briefing.

On November 21, 2013, a majority of the news outlets covering the White House submitted a joint letter to Carney complaining about the lack of access provided to reporters. The letter specifically addressed several instances where the Press Corps was told a certain event was private, yet the White House allowed White House Photographer Pete Souza exclusive access to the event. On December 12, 2013, Carney was confronted by most of the White House Press Corps for the unprecedented lack of access to the President during a routine news conference. During the discussion, the reporters became increasingly frustrated and often talked over Carney. The White House Press Corps noted that while President Obama promised a more transparent administration, CNN's Brianna Keilar notes, "anyone here can tell you there's less access than under the Bush administration". Carney proceeded to cite the rise of internet journalism for making photojournalists obsolete, but promised the White House would do everything it could to rectify this problem.

On May 30, 2014, President Obama announced Carney would be succeeded by Josh Earnest.

Post-Obama administration career

Following Carney's stint as press secretary, he worked as a CNN senior political analyst from September 2014 until February 2015.

On March 2, 2015, Carney began working for Amazon as the senior vice president of Worldwide Corporate Affairs.

Personal life

He lives in Washington, D.C. with his wife, Claire Shipman (a senior correspondent for ABC News) and their two children. He is a devoted fan of the indie rock band, Guided By Voices.


