
#Article: Mansur Yavaş
#Type: regular article

Mansur Yavaş (born 23 May 1955) is a Turkish lawyer, local politician and the former mayor of Beypazarı. He was the mayoral candidate for the metropolitan municipality of Ankara from the Republican People's Party in the local elections of 2014.

Early life and education

Yavaş was born in the town of Beypazarı, a district of the Ankara Province of Turkey. His father was a former carpenter who ran a business as a newspaper vendor for which Yavaş worked as a paperboy. He completed his primary and secondary education in Beypazarı and started attending Istanbul University in 1979, graduating with a degree in law in 1983. After completing his mandatory military service as a military prosecutor, Yavaş returned to Beypazarı and began practicing law as a private attorney.

Political career

Yavaş was elected a member of the municipal council of Beypazarı in 1989. He ran unsuccessfully for the office of the mayor of Beypazarı in 1994. Yavaş continued his legal practice and council membership until 18 April 1999, when he ran again and was elected mayor with 51% of the vote.

2014 Turkish Local Elections

Yavaş was the Republican People's Party's candidate for mayor in Ankara for the Turkish local elections held on 30 March 2014. At 20:30 local time on the day of the election, after voting had ended and the count was underway, he held a press conference declaring victory and urging his supporters to remain at voting stations to monitor the count despite very unfavorable preliminary result information from the Anadolu News Agency. On 1 April 2014 Yavaş held a press conference where he accused the government-owned Anadolu News Agency of deliberately delaying the broadcast of vote counts from areas with strong support for the Republican People's Party in order to discourage volunteers from continuing to monitor the count. Yavaş stated that his campaign had filed objections with the local election authorities regarding numerous irregularities and urged his supporters, who had gathered in front of the Supreme Electoral Council, to stay calm.

Personal life

Mansur Yavaş married Nursen Yavaş in 1986. They have two daughters, Armağan and Çağlayan.

See also

	 Mustafa Sarıgül


