
#Article: Ivan Misner
#Type: regular article

Ivan Misner is the founder and Chairman of business networking organization BNI, called the “Father of Modern Networking” by CNN and the “Networking Guru” by Entrepreneur magazine.

Career

Misner graduated with degrees in political science and management. In 1980 he was hired by the president of a transportation company in Los Angeles to turn it around. Joining as the Assistant to the President, he was soon tasked with running the purchasing operation, and later was put in charge of sales and marketing. Misner graduated with a Ph.D. in organizational behavior from the University of Southern California in 1993.

BNI

After starting his own consultancy business, Misner founded BNI in California in 1985 after losing a big client "looking for referrals for my consultancy practice and for fellow business people who I liked and trusted" and "for the primary purpose of building powerful referral networks". Misner later created the concept statement around which BNI now operates Givers Gain. Having expanded across North America and globally through a franchise-based business model, BNI now claims to be the largest business networking group in the world.

Author

Misner has written 16 books including the New York Times bestseller Truth or Delusion? Busting Networking’s Biggest Myths, and co-author of the Wall Street Journal best seller "The 29% Solution: 52 Weekly Networking Success Strategies.

Misner is a columnist for Entrepreneur.com and Business Insider, and has featured in the L.A. Times, Wall Street Journal, Washington Post, and other publications, as well as television and radio shows on CNN, CNBC, the BBC and The Today Show on NBC.

Other works

An advocated the teaching of networking skills in university business studies curricula, Misner has taught business management and social capital courses at several United States universities. He is on the Board of Trustees for the University of La Verne. Misner trademarked his name in April 2011.

Personal life

Misner grew up in Covina, California and graduated from Gladstone High School. Misner and his wife Beth lived with their three children in Claremont, California, until the couple moved to Austin, Texas in 2013. In his spare time he is also an amateur magician.

Publications

See also

	 Givers Gain


