
#Article: Ivan Amodei
#Type: regular article

Ivan Amodei (born August 22, 1976) is a magician who specializes in close-up magic, parlor magic and sleight of hand. Ivan performs at the Beverly Wilshire - A Four Seasons Hotel in Beverly Hills California.

Biography

Ivan Amodei was born in the village of Comiso, on the island of Sicily. He immigrated with his family to America and was raised in Brooklyn, New York. He moved to southern California where he attended Thousand Oaks High School and California Lutheran University. He graduated with a degree in Marketing/Advertising and a minor in English. He speaks English, Italian, and Spanish.

In 1999, he became a regular performer at the Magic Castle in Hollywood. In 2005, he won first place at the International Brotherhood of Magicians Close-Up Competition. In 2005, he won FIRST place at the Society of American Magicians Close-Up Competition, as well as, the People's Choice Award.

In 2010 Ivan book Magic's Most Amazing Stories was published and was nominated by ForeWord Review for book of the year. On October 23, 2010 Ivan opened a one man show at the Four Seasons Hotel Westlake Village it was named Made in Italy. On December 31, 2010 Ivan did a guest appearance at the Beverly Wilshire Hotel in Beverly Hills that lead to an open run of his show at the historic hotel. The name of the show was then changed to Intimate Illusions. Splash magazine called him a "Master in his art." In May 2012 Westlake Magazine included Ivan in their achievers issue. In June 2012 Ivan received recognition by the honorable Mayor of Beverly Hills William W. Brien M.D. for his contribution to the world of magic and illusion. Ivan currently lives in Southern California on his ranch with his twin boy and girl and wife.

Awards

	 1995 the Las Vegas Close-Up Classic - First place.

	 1998 (IBM) International Brotherhood of Magicians - Award of Merit.

	 1999 (PCAM) Pacific Coast Association of Magicians Outstanding Showmanship.

	 1999 (PCAM) Pacific Coast Association of Magicians - First Place.

	 2004 (IBM) International Brotherhood of Magicians - Award of Merit.

	 2005 (IBM) International Brotherhood of Magicians - First Place.

	 2005 (SAM) Society of American Magicians - People's Choice Award.

	 2005 (SAM) Society of American Magicians - First Place.

In 2010 Amodei wrote his first book Magic's Most Amazing Stories A collection of incredible stories from world famous magicians. In 2010 the book was nominated for book of the year for humor.


