
#Article: J. Christopher Reyes
#Type: regular article

Christopher Reyes (born 1954) is the co-chairman, with his brother Jude Reyes, of Reyes Holdings, a beer and food distribution holding company, ranked by Forbes magazine in 2012 as the 14th largest privately held company in the United States. 

Biography

J. Christopher Reyes was born December 29, 1953. He graduated from the University of Maryland and began working at a small beer distribution business that he purchased with his brother and father in Spartanburg, South Carolina.

He began his business career by purchasing a small Schlitz beer distribution business in Spartanburg, South Carolina with his brother and father. Running all aspects of the operation with his brother, the firm aggressively acquired beer distribution businesses and brands. Since 1976, Reyes Holdings has acquired more than 115 beer distribution operations. In April 1998, the firm expanded beyond beer distribution with the purchase of The Martin-Brower Company, a dedicated McDonald’s distribution business operating primarily in the US. 

Philanthropy

He is chairman of the Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago and a member of the Board of Trustees for Ronald McDonald House Charities .  

He sits on the Board of Directors for Museum of Science and Industry of Chicago, the Boys and Girls Clubs of Chicago, the Steppenwolf Theater Company, the Lyric Opera of Chicago, the United Way of Metropolitan Chicago, the University of Notre Dame, and the Lake Forest Academy. He is also a member of the Economic Club of Chicago, the Commercial Club of Chicago and the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs .

Political donations

A Republican, he has donated $25,250 to former Illinois Lieutenant Governor Corinne Wood. From 1994 to 2007, he donated $80,200 to the Illinois Republican Party and the Lake County Republican Party committees. He also donated $100,000 to Two Party System, Inc., a Republican PAC.

Personal life

As of September 2011, he is the 651st richest person in the world, and the 212 richest in the United States, with an estimated wealth of US$2 billion. In 2010, he bought a 44-acre house in Aspen, Colorado for $47.5 million. He is married, with four children and lives in Hobe Sound, Florida.


