
#Article: Jack Fellure
#Type: regular article

Lowell Jackson "Jack" Fellure (born October 3, 1931) is an American perennial political candidate and retired engineer. He was the presidential nominee of the Prohibition Party for the 2012 presidential election.

Campaigns

Fellure has formally campaigned for President of the United States in every presidential election since 1988 as a member of the Republican Party.  He asserts on his campaign website that his platform based on the 1611 Authorized King James Bible has never changed. As a candidate, he calls for the elimination of the liquor industry, abortion and pornography, and advocates prayer in public schools and criminalization of homosexuality. He has blamed the ills of society on those he has characterized as "atheists, Marxists, liberals, queers, liars, draft dodgers, flag burners, dope addicts, sex perverts and anti-Christians."

In 1992, Fellure filed to run in the New Hampshire, West Virginia and Kansas Republican primaries. By November 1991, he had spent $40,000 of his own money on the campaign, and he sent a King James Bible to the Federal Election Commission as a copy of his platform. Regarding the 1611 English version of the Bible, translated by 47 Church of England scholars at the request of King James, he said, "God wrote it as the supreme document and final authority in the affairs of all men, nations and civilizations, for time and eternity... It shall never be necessary to change it." He received 36 votes in the New Hampshire primary and complained that President George H.W. Bush and commentator Pat Buchanan were receiving all the media attention.

During the 1996 presidential election while running for the Republican Party presidential nomination, he criticized former President George H.W. Bush as a man "responsible for inestimable damage toward the destruction of this sovereign democratic constitutional republic who continued to water the seeds of international, Satanic Marxism to the exclusion of our national sovereignty".  He added that President Bill Clinton "merely shifted into overdrive the socialistic, Marxist New World Order agenda." In the general election, Fellure received one write-in vote in Idaho.

He again ran in 2000, and in 2004, challenged incumbent President George W. Bush for the Republican Party nomination. He was the only candidate to appear alongside Bush in the North Dakota caucus, as he met the Federal Election Commission requirement of $5,000 in receipts. He received 14 of the 2,020 votes cast, and lost all 26 delegates to Bush.

Prohibition Party 2012

After another run in 2008, Fellure initially ran for the Republican Party's 2012 presidential nomination. He then decided to seek the nomination of the Prohibition Party at the party's national convention in Cullman, Alabama.  Fellure was nominated for president on the second ballot, beating out former Thompson Township tax assessor and longtime Prohibition Party activist James Hedges of Pennsylvania. Party chairman Toby Davis was named as his running mate. The ticket appeared on the ballot only in Louisiana and received 518 votes on Election Day.

Return to Republican Party

In November 2012, Fellure filed with the FEC to run for the Republican Party's 2016 presidential nomination.

Personal life

Fellure was born in Midkiff, West Virginia, in 1931. He resides in Hurricane, West Virginia, with his wife Jean, and is the father of six children.

See also

	Christian views on alcohol

	Dominion Theology

	King James Only movement

	Radical Right

	Perennial candidate

	Protestant fundamentalism


