
#Article: Jake Corman
#Type: regular article

Jacob Doyle "Jake" Corman III is a Republican member of the Pennsylvania State Senate, where he serves as Majority Leader, who has represented the 34th Senatorial District since 1999. The district includes all of Centre, Mifflin and Juniata Counties and portions of Huntingdon County, and includes State College, home of Penn State.

Personal

Corman is a graduate of Bellefonte Area High School, the Pennsylvania College of Technology where he earned an associate degree in Communications and The Pennsylvania State University where he received a BA degree in Journalism.

He was State Director for Central Pennsylvania for United States Senator Rick Santorum from 1994 through 1998. He was Field Service Director for the Pennsylvania Builders Association from 1993 through 1994.

Career

In 1998, Corman's father, Doyle Corman, a Pennsylvania State Senator for 21 years, announced his retirement from the Senate. Corman announced that he would run for his father's seat. During the three-way GOP primary, Corman was attacked by the other candidates for a 1995 drunk driving conviction, as well as his admission to experimenting with marijuana in the 1980s. Despite the minor controversy, Corman prevailed in the won a three-way GOP primary and went on to defeat Democrat Scott Conklin (now a member Pennsylvania House of Representatives) in the general election.

In a 2002 PoliticsPA Feature story designating politicians with yearbook superlatives, he was named the "Best Dressed," to which he responded ""This never could have happened if I hadn't met my wife two years ago. She threw all my clothes in the dumpster, took me shopping and dressed me properly. Thank you for recognizing Kelli's hard work."

In 2002, Corman was re-elected with over 92% of the vote, facing only minimal opposition from a Libertarian Party candidate.  In 2006, Corman defeated Democrat Jon Eich, Robert J. Cash, and Libertarian Thomas Martin with 56% of the vote.  After the leadership shakeup following the 2006 elections, Corman bid for the position of Senate Majority Leader, but was edged out by Dominic Pileggi  and was ultimately elected as the Majority Policy Chairman, succeeding Joe Scarnati.

In early 2008, there was speculation that Corman would make a run for the U.S. House seat being vacated by John E. Peterson; however Corman declined to run.

In November 2008, Corman was elected by his caucus to serve as Chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee. 

The Pennsylvania Report named him to the 2009 "The Pennsylvania Report 100" list of influential figures in Pennsylvania politics and called him of the state's "rising stars."

In 2010, Corman again defeated Democrat Jon Eich for re-election garnering 69.4% of the vote.

In 2014, Corman was unopposed for re-election.

In November 2014, Corman was elected by his caucus to serve in the position of Senate Majority Leader for the 2015-2016 legislative session.  


