
#Article: Jami Floyd
#Type: regular article

Jami Floyd is an American attorney, journalist, network news anchor, legal and political analyst, former White House Fellow, and former host of TED Talks in NYC on NYC Media. She is the former Legal Contributor at Al Jazeera America and currently is a host and legal analyst at WNYC Radio.

Education

While at Binghamton University as an undergraduate, Floyd worked as disc jockey at WHRW.  Floyd graduated in 1986 with a B.A. in political science and a concentration in Journalism. In 1989, she attended and graduated with honors from the UC Berkeley School of Law, University of California, Berkeley, where she had been an associate editor of the law review. She received a Master of Laws degree in 1995 from Stanford Law School, Stanford University, where she also worked as a teaching fellow.

Career

Law

Floyd began working as an attorney in the California Supreme Court as a law clerk to Honorable Associate Justice Allen E. Broussard.

She began practice in civil and criminal law when she entered the law firm Morrison & Foerster.  She left the firm in 1993 to join the San Francisco Public Defender office, where she worked as a trial attorney.

Washington, DC

Later that year, Floyd was selected to serve in the Clinton Administration as a White House Fellow and moved to Washington, DC. She was assigned first to the office of First Lady Hillary Clinton,where she assisted in the Clinton Administration’s effort to pass comprehensive Health Care legislation, and later to the staff of Vice President Al Gore where she worked on the Brady Handgun Prevention Act, the Violent Crime Control and the Enforcement Act of 1994 and various other domestic policy initiatives.

Television

Floyd's first television broadcasting job was as reporter and legal analyst for KPIX Radio and TV in San Francisco. During that time, she spent much of her time in Los Angeles, covering the murder trial of O. J. Simpson and the nationwide response to his acquittal.In 1995, she briefly joined CBC News as a legal analyst before moving to New York City to help launch the cable outlet Court TV, as an anchor and correspondent.

In 1998 she joined ABC News where she worked for almost ten years, most of those spent as the networks Law & Justice Correspondent. In February 2005, Floyd returned to Court TV (now truTV) In January 2006, Court TV gave Floyd her own series, Jami Floyd: Best Defense. From 2006 through 2010, Floyd offered her legal analysis and spin on topical issues, as well as coverage of major trials.

Floyd has worked Court TV as news correspondent and news anchor; and at ABC News, where she reported for World News Tonight alongside Peter Jennings. She has contributed her legal knowledge to segments of Good Morning America and Nightline, and has co-anchored both World News Now and Early Morning News. She led the consumer reports unit for 20/20., and she has also served as a radio analyst for WNYC since 2007.

Filmography

Appearing as herself, Floyd has appeared on or hosted:

	 Disorder in the Court: The 20 Most Outrageous Courtroom Moments (2006 and 2007)

	 Justice (1 episode, 2006)

	 Quite Frankly with Stephen A. Smith (3 episodes, 2006)

	 The Wire: Odyssey, The Wire: The Last Word (2007)

	 Disorder in the Court 3, 4 and 6 (2008)

	 The Smoking Gun Presents: World's Dumbest (11 episodes, 2008)

	 The O'Reilly Factor (2 episodes, 2008)

	 Jami Floyd: Best Defense (53 episodes, 2006-2009)

	 Huckabee (2 episodes, 2010)

	 Ted Talks in New York (2012; also as director)

Journalism

In April 2005, Floyd caused a stir with comments she made to the LA Times about then-Court TV colleague Nancy Grace. Floyd expressed a concern in the LA Times that Grace presented a televised rush to judgment, "I rarely agree with what comes out of her mouth, but it's hard not to like the person," said Floyd, who returned to Court TV's midday programming in 2005 after nearly a decade at ABC News. She went on to say "We have a lot of guests who come on and mimic Nancy."  

In September 2005, Floyd elaborated on her comments about Grace in Elle Magazine saying: "Nancy's appeal is not unlike Oprah's. Nancy is Everywoman, someone you could see at a mall, on the bus. She's not an elitist from Harvard. She is what any woman could become." 

In March 2008, Floyd participated in the Glamour roundtable "Your Race, Your Looks." "I grew up in New York City, which you would think is a diverse place, but I was called all kinds of names related to race, ... My mother’s white, ... But my parents pressed upon me that “In this world, you are a black woman.” -"Your Race, Your Looks" Roundtable, 2008Floyd has served as a frequent guest on Fox News, and Floyd's 2009 tangle with political commentator and Fox News host Bill O'Reilly over revelations about CIA torture practices in the post-9/11 search for terrorists generated over a million views on YouTube.

From 2010 to 2014 she was a regular contributor to the WNYC.org website “It’s a Free Country,” and the PBS.org website “Need to Know,” writing about politics, race, law and justice.

In May 2012, Floyd published a piece for Marie Claire, a women's magazine, to Samantha Brick's essay, "Don't Hate Me Because I'm Beautiful."

In November 2014, she appeared in the Slate installment of the Serial Spoiler Special: "What's the Deal with Jay?".

Recognition

Floyd has been nominated twice for an Emmy Award and has won a Gracie Award, a Telly Award, and the National Association of Black Journalists Salute to Excellence Award.

Awards and nominations

	 1999, nominated for News and Documentary Emmy Award for 'Outstanding Coverage of a Breaking News Story'

	 2002, won CINE Golden Eagle Award for work as correspondent on ABC News 20/20.

	 2003, won Radio and Television News Directors Association UNITY Award.

	 2006, won National Association of Black Journalists 'Salute to Excellence Award'

	 2007, won Gracie Award for 'Outstanding Host of a Television News Program'

	 won Telly Award for 'Outstanding Co-Anchor'

	 won one US International Film & Video Festival Gold Camera Award for her news piece, "Justice Delayed", in which Floyd investigated the murder of a DNA-research-specializing scientist.

	 In August 2015, she was named a Public Scholar by the New York Council for the Humanities, for a two year term, fall 2015 to fall 2017.

Personal life

Floyd was born September 10, 1964, and raised in New York City.  Her father formerly worked as a chief architect for restaurateur Warner LeRoy and was also keen in arts and decorating.  Floyd says that she is an "African American", having been born to a black father and a white mother. Her family lived in Mitchell-Lama housing on the Lower East Side.

Floyd married Kurt Flehinger, and they have two children together.  In August 2005 Floyd purchased an apartment in New York's Upper West Side, where the family has since resided.


