
#Article: Jane F. Barry
#Type: regular article

Jane Barry Born in Boston, Massachusetts, USA on 15 September 1966. She is an international women's rights author and principal at Linksbridge living on Bainbridge Island, Washington, USA.

Personal details

Jane is married and has two daughters, Juliette and Alyssa.

Early career

Ms Barry studied Soviet Studies at Middlebury College, Vermont, USA before moving to California and working on Soviet-American co-operation issues as part of the emerging Citizen diplomacy movement, with organisations including the Esalen Institute Soviet-American Exchange Program just as the 'Iron Curtain' began to fall.

She worked in the former Soviet Union from 1989-1994, taking part in demonstrations against the attempted August 1991 coup d'etat against Mikhail Gorbachev and in support of democracy - being one of the first foreigners to join the shield of ordinary people outside the Russian White House.

Humanitarian work

In 1991, she joined CARE USA working in Russia on HIV/AIDS issues  and other former Soviet republics including Tajikistan and Georgia during their break-away conflicts.

In 1995, CARE USA posted her to Rwanda to work in the aftermath of the 1994 Rwandan genocide.

From 1995 to 1998, Barry worked in Bosnia and Liberia for CARE  before leaving the organisation to become an independent consultant.

Policy work and women's rights

In her more recent career, she has worked in Côte d'Ivoire, Iraq, Sierra Leone, Chechnya, Kosovo, and South Africa for Save the Children UK,Help Age International, the UK Department for International Development, and the Urgent Action Fund for Women's Human Rights.

Jane Barry's written work has been translated into Albanian, French, Nepali, Serbo-Croat, Sinhala, Spanish and Tamil, is required reading at Fordham University Institute of International Humanitarian Affairs, and has been described by Women in Black as a "homage to women activists who are engaged throughout the world: from Europe across Africa and Asia to Latin America" (Belgrade, July 2005).

Since 2008, Jane Barry has worked as a principal at the Seattle office of the consulting firm Linksbridge.

Publications

Jane Barry's recent published works include:

	A Bridge Too Far: Aid Agencies and the Military in Humanitarian Response (2002) 

	Rising up in Response (2005)

	What's the Point of the Revolution if We Can't Dance? (2007)

	Insiste, Persiste, Resiste, Existe (2008)

Commentary on and reviews of Jane Barry's writing

Women's rights Internet resources citing Jane Barry's work include:

	Giving voice to silent emergencies

	Voices of Solidarity : International Women Activists Share their Perspective on the Katrina Disaster

	Kosovar Women's Voice

	The Rory Peck Trust Free Lens

	PeaceWomen

	Association for Women's Rights in Development (AWID)

	UN Non-governmental Liaison Service

	The New Humanitarians: A Review of Trends in International Humanitarian Action


