
#Article: Frank LoBiondo
#Type: regular article

Frank Alo LoBiondo (born May 12, 1946) is the U.S. Representative for , serving since 1995. He is a member of the Republican Party. The district is at the southern end of New Jersey, and is the largest congressional district in the state. It includes all of Atlantic, Cape May, Cumberland and Salem Counties and parts of Camden, Gloucester, Burlington, and Ocean Counties.

Early life, education, and business career

Born in Bridgeton, New Jersey, LoBiondo attended Georgetown Preparatory School, and received a B.A. in Business Administration from Saint Joseph's University in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He worked for twenty-six years in a family-owned trucking company.

Early political career

LoBiondo served on the Cumberland County Board of Chosen Freeholders from 1985 to 1987. In 1987, he was elected to NJ's 1st Legislative district in the lower chamber of the New Jersey General Assembly and served from 1988 to 1994. He won re-election in 1989, 1991, and 1993.

U.S. House of Representatives

Elections

In 1992, LoBiondo ran for the U.S. House of Representatives, but was defeated by incumbent Democrat William Hughes by a wide margin. When Hughes declined to run for re-election in 1994, LoBiondo ran again and was elected to the House. He was a member of the Republican "freshman class" elected in the 1994 midterm election and was part of Speaker Newt Gingrich's Contract with America. Since then, he has won every re-election bid with at least 59% of the vote even though he represents a district that is marginally Democratic on paper. In 2012, his district gave President Barack Obama 54% of the vote.

	2014

LoBiondo is running for re-election to the U.S. House in 2014. He won the Republican nomination in the primary election on June 3, 2014. He will face Democrat William J. Hughes in the general election.

He has been endorsed by Gov. Chris Christie, the Laborers’ International Union of North America, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the New Jersey State Building & Construction Trades Council, and the New Jersey State Fraternal Order of Police.

Tenure

LoBiondo is a member of the moderate Republican Main Street Partnership. His record on several issues, particularly the environment, fits a moderate Republican. In 2005, National Journal ranked him as the most liberal Republican representative in New Jersey and more liberal than most of New York's Republican congressional representatives. Americans for Democratic Action in 2005 placed him in a higher liberal quotient than most of the Republican representatives in those two states. In 2011, LoBiondo appeared in an It Gets Better Project video, part of a YouTube campaign reaching out to young gay teens who have been bullied.

	Campaign treasurer

On March 4, 2011, Andrew J. McCrosson Jr., who served as treasurer of LoBiondo's congressional campaign committee from 1995 until August 2010, pleaded guilty in federal district court to charges of embezzling more than $458,000 from campaign accounts over a fifteen-year period. The charges included one count of wire fraud and one count of and converting funds contributed to a federal candidate. LoBiondo’s campaign attorney called this "an abuse of the trust placed in him by the campaign." McCrosson was sentenced 30 months in prison.

Legislation sponsored

On November 21, 2013, LoBiondo introduced Bill H.R. 3578; 113th Congress into the House. The bill would require that "any federal rules on testing of air traffic controllers for sleep disorders are issued under a formal rulemaking process."

In 2012, LoBiondo, along with Democratic congressman Frank Pallone, introduced legislation allowing states to legalize sports betting, then only allowed in four states, arguing it would strengthen Atlantic City as a venue for tourists’ dollars.

Committee assignments

	 Committee on Armed Services

	 Subcommittee on Tactical Air and Land Forces

	 Subcommittee on Readiness

	 Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

	 Subcommittee on Aviation (Chairman)

	 Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

	 Subcommittee on Highways and Transit

	 Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence

Caucus memberships

	 Congressional Arts Caucus

Electoral history


