
#Article: Jennifer Jolly
#Type: regular article

Jennifer Jolly (born February 22, 1971) is an American journalist and broadcaster. She is a tech lifestyle contributor, nationally syndicated columnist and tech and social media commentator.

Career

Jolly hosts the weekly online video series, Tech’s Appeal, seen on Tecca, Yahoo!, USA Today and McDonald’s flagship “M” Channel. Her columns on digital parenting issues and gadget how-to’s are shown on AOL, Time.com, GalTime, Yahoo! Shine, and many others. She is also a frequent guest contributor for numerous broadcast outlets including HLN, Dr. Oz and the CBS Early Show.

Prior to expanding consumer tech content to emerging new media platforms, Jennifer was the Tech/Social Media Co-Host for ABC’s 7Live, a daily one-hour current events TV program in San Francisco. She also hosted All That’s Fit, a 30-minute healthy lifestyle series on the Fine Living Network for five seasons. From 1993-2007, she was a TV reporter and anchor for KTVU (SF Bay Area, eight years), and ABC (KXLY, Spokane), NBC (KRON, KTUU, KECI) and Fox affiliates throughout the country. While at KTVU Channel 2 in Oakland, California an incident at a protest rally ended her career at the station. Reporting on anti-Iraq War protests on March 20, 2003, Jolly was hit in the face with a cream pie by protestors who alleged she was reporting hyperbole and baseless claims about violence and pandemonium they were causing. She flared up publicly after being hit with a cream pie, which was witnessed by dozens of people. She was soon dismissed from KTVU for her behavior. A video of the pie attack, and the protests she was reporting on, can be viewed on YouTube under the title, "Jennifer Jolly Pied."

Personal life

Jennifer grew up in Kenai, Alaska and was awarded a journalism scholarship. She went to the University of San Francisco, where she graduated with a Bachelor’s Degree in Communications in 1993. She is married to photographer and video cameraman, Roddy Blelloch. She lives in the San Francisco Bay Area with her husband and daughter, and has two step-sons in college.Jennifer has competed in a number of Triathlons, Marathons, and horse riding events.


