
#Article: Jeremy Maggs
#Type: regular article

Jeremy Maggs (born 1 February 1961) is a South African journalist, radio host and television presenter, best known for hosting the game show Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? and for anchoring the Primetime news show on DStv's eNews Channel. He has also co-hosted the quiz show Test The Nation and currently hosts his own show "Maggs On Media" - also on the eNews Channel, where he continues to watch the industry. In radio, Maggs co-presented SAfm's weekday afternoon current affairs programme, PM Live, as well as being the host of the Sunday morning media and advertising show, Media @ SAFM which focused on the advertising and communications industry. The program ran for 10 years and Maggs refers to it as his "great joy". He also is an editor, publishing The Annual; a hardcover of the yearly business in the media.

Early life

Maggs was born on 1 February 1961 in Johannesburg, South Africa. He studied Journalism at the then Natal Technikon, Maggs began a career in journalism writing for such publications as the Eastern Province Herald and Durban's Sunday Tribune.

Career

After leaving Natal Technikon, Maggs began a career in journalism writing for such publications as the Eastern Province Herald and Durban's Sunday Tribune. He still writes a weekly column for The Herald called 'Daze of My Life'.

Maggs is best known for presenting the game show Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? from 2000 until 2005 when the show ended that year after 100 episodes. Maggs also became the presenter of Test the Nation and also hosted SABC3's weekly media and advertising show, Media Focus.

His first foray into radio was with Radio 702 where he stayed for a decade and in the process, he became the station's news editor and a regular current affairs anchor - at one point in a spicily memorable breakfast show partnership with 702's Jenny Crwys-Williams - with a reputation as a tough interviewer. Maggs gained attention for breaking the story of the Assassination of Chris Hani and co-hosted a live rolling news programme on the Death of Princess Diana in 1997. After leaving 702, Maggs went to present the SABC2 breakfast show which he co-hosted with Nothemba Madumo. This show led him to present Media@SAfm and then to AM Live after the resignation of John Perlman. Maggs refers to the show as his "great joy".

In August 2007, Maggs was announced to be the editor of a magazine called Mags which itself is about content relating to magazines.

In February 2008, Maggs joined the e.Sat pay channel's 24-hour news programme as one of the co-anchors. In the process, he left AM Live in March 2008. Maggs hosted alongside Redi Direko until May 2009, when Nikiwe Bikitsha took her place.

Maggs was also the editor of the Journal of Marketing which was the official publication of the Marketing Association of South Africa (MASA). l of Marketing. He was previously the advertising and media writer on the Financial Mail and had responsibility for the authoritative yearly industry review called Ad Focus. He now publishes his own hardcover review of the industry called The Annual and serves as editor-in-chief for the popular, revitalised version of the Journal of Marketing, The Redzone.

Personal life

Maggs has lived in Johannesburg all his life. He and his wife Anne have two daughters. He is an avid reader and collector of books and enjoys cycling in his spare time.


