
#Article: Jill Briscoe
#Type: regular article

Jill Briscoe (born 29 June 1935) is a British American author, editor, and speaker. She has written or co-written over 40 books and serves as the founder and Executive Editor of Just Between Us magazine. She is a former member of the boards of directors of World Relief and Christianity Today.

Personal background

Jill P. (née Ryder) Briscoe was born on 29 June 1935 in Liverpool, Lancashire, England, the daughter of William "Bill" and Margaret "Peggy" Ryder. She attended Homerton College, Cambridge, graduating with a diploma to teach in the public school system. She taught for three years and served for ten years as the director of Capernwray Hall, a nursery school and Christian youth centre. She married Stuart Briscoe in 1958 in Liverpool. They have three adult children, and the couple resides in Oconomowoc, Wisconsin.

Professional background

Briscoe came to the United States in 1970, when her husband was called to serve as the senior pastor of Elmbrook Church, in Brookfield, Wisconsin. There she served as a member of the laity and established a youth ministry called the God Squad, while also taking the lead in the development of Elmbrook's women's ministry. She began to speak extensively all over North America. In 2000, after her husband stepped down from his pastorate, she and her husband began serving as ministers-at-large of Elmbrook Church, allowing them to travel around the world teaching pastors, missionaries, and church leaders.

Briscoe has written or co-written over 40 books, ranging in genre and subject matter from scriptural studies and devotionals to poetry and children's books. She serves as a member of the teaching staff of Telling the Truth Ministries, a worldwide media ministry founded by her husband. She is the founder and executive editor of Just Between Us, a Christian women's lifestyle magazine that serves women involved in church ministry. She is a former member of the boards of directors of World Relief and Christianity Today, having served in that capacity for over 20 years.


