
#Article: Jim Yardley
#Type: regular article

James Barrett "Jim" Yardley (born June 18, 1964) is an American journalist currently working in Rome.

Yardley is a graduate of Walter Hines Page High School in Greensboro, North Carolina and received a B.A. in history from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, class of '86. He joined the Times in 1997 and first worked as a metropolitan reporter in New York, and then became the bureau chief in Houston in 1999. His topics have included social unrest, minority uprisings, and pollution issues in China. He was the South Asia bureau chief based in New Delhi until 2013, when he moved to Rome and became the bureau chief there.

From 1990 to 1997, Yardley was a national desk reporter for the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, based in Atlanta, Birmingham and New Orleans.

He also worked for the Anniston Star and New York Times Company regional newspapers in Fairfax County, Virginia. As well, he has written magazine articles for The New York Times Magazine, Oxford American, Essence and Redbook.

Awards

In 2006, Yardley and his colleague, Times Beijing bureau chief Joseph Kahn, won the Pulitzer Prize for International Reporting, for a series of eight articles on the "ragged justice in China as the booming nation's legal system evolves."

In 2007, a three-part article by Jim Yardley, "Crisis on the Yellow River" — published in three parts in the Asia edition of the International Herald Tribune — won the Society of Publishers in Asia award for explanatory reporting.

In 2014, Yardley won the George Polk Award for foreign reporting for a series of articles on unsafe work conditions in the garment industry in Bangladesh and the collapse of a factory building that killed more than 1,100 workers.

Family

Yardley is a son of Jonathan Yardley, a book critic for The Washington Post, and Rosemary Roberts. He and his father are one of two pairs of father-son Pulitzer Prize winners.

Yardley's brother Bill is the Seattle bureau chief for The New York Times.

Yardley, his wife and three children live in Rome.


