
#Article: Jocelyn Stevens
#Type: regular article

Sir Jocelyn Edward Greville Stevens, CVO (14 February 1932 - 9 October 2014) was the publisher of Queen magazine and a London newspaper executive.

Education and career

Stevens attended Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, and Sandhurst, where he won the Sword of Honour. He went on to do national service in the Rifle Brigade.

He built a career in journalism and publishing. In 1957 he bought the British high society publication The Queen, which he revamped, renaming it Queen and hiring Beatrix Miller as editor. In the 1960s he provided financial backing for the first British pirate radio station Radio Caroline. In the 1960s-1970s he was named as managing director of the Evening Standard and Daily Express newspapers. A British newspaper obituary observed that, in the course of his newspaper career, Stevens "revelled in his image as a posh bully, living up, or down, to Private Eye's nickname for him: "Piranha teeth."

Stevens was Chairman of English Heritage from 1992-2000. In 1992 he was awarded a CVO for his part in curating the Sovereign Exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum, and he was knighted in 1996.

Family

Stevens was born in Marylebone, Central London, England. He was the son of Major Charles Greville Bartlett Stewart-Stevens and Betty Stevens (née Hulton), who died shortly after his birth. His father blamed Stevens for his mother's death, and the child was left in a flat near to Baker Street in London, attended to by nannies, a maid, a cook, a priest and a chauffeur.

He was the nephew of the magazine publisher Sir Edward George Warris Hulton and the grandson of the newspaper publisher Sir Edward Hulton, 1st Baronet and his second wife, the music hall artist known by the stage name Millie Lindon. His step-brother was the military officer Sir Blair Stewart-Wilson, Equerry to Her Majesty The Queen and Deputy Master of the Household in the Royal Household from 1976 to 1994. His step-sister Prudence, Lady Penn (née Stewart-Wilson), was a lady-in-waiting to Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother and the wife of the former Comptroller of the Lord Chamberlain's Office, Lieutenant-Colonel Sir Eric Penn.

He was married to Jane Armyne Sheffield, a lady-in-waiting to Princess Margaret, for 23 years until 1979. They had four children, two sons and two daughters. Their daughter Pandora married property developer Charles Delevingne and they have three daughters, Chloe, and models Poppy Delevingne and Cara Delevingne. Stevens was a long-term partner of the philanthropist Dame Vivien Duffield until they separated in 2005. In 2008, he married Emma Cheape, daughter of the late Sir Iain Tennant and former wife of Angus Cheape of Strathtyrum.


