
#Article: Alex Kendrick
#Type: regular article

Alex Kendrick is an American film writer, producer, director and actor. From 1999 to 2014, he was an associate pastor at Sherwood Baptist Church, in Albany, Georgia, where he led the movie outreach of the church, which includes Sherwood Pictures, the movie-creating entity that produced Flywheel (2003), Facing the Giants (2006), Fireproof (2008), and Courageous (2011). He has co-authored several best-selling books with his brother Stephen, including The Love Dare, which appeared for 131 weeks on The New York Times Paperback Advice & Misc. Best Seller list. His book, The Resolution for Men, again with his brother, also appeared on the New York Times Best Seller list. He now leads Kendrick Brothers Productions with his two brothers, Stephen and Shannon.

Kendrick's fifth film War Room was a box office number-one in the second weekend of release in the United States.

Kendrick is married to Christina Kendrick, and they have six children together named Joshua, Anna, Catherine, Joy, Caleb, and Julia.

Film career

Upon reading a survey stating that films have become more influential than churches, Kendrick set out to change the perception of movies in mainstream America. He co-wrote (with brother Stephen Kendrick), directed and acted in all four movies Sherwood Pictures has produced. Their second film, Facing the Giants, grossed over $10 million at the box office. The football feature became the best-selling Christian DVD of 2007. His third film, Fireproof, grossed $33.5 million, making it the highest-grossing independent film of 2008. The project went on to win Best Feature at the 2009 San Antonio Independent Christian Film Festival, as well as the Epiphany Prize at the Movieguide Awards in Los Angeles. The fourth feature film by Sherwood Pictures, Courageous, distributed by TriStar, was released in theaters in September 2011 and grossed $34.5 million. The film won Best Feature Film and the Jubilee Award at the 2012 San Antonio Independent Christian Film Festival as well as the Epiphany Prize at the 2012 Movieguide Awards. Courageous was also the first winner of the K-Love Movie Impact Award (presented in 2013) and winner of the first Dove Award for Movie of the Year (also presented in 2013). Kendrick also appeared in the 2013 film The Lost Medallion and the 2014 film Moms' Night Out.

The Kendrick brothers' fifth film, War Room, was released in theaters across the United States on August 28, 2015. War Room focuses on the transformational role that prayer can play in an individual’s life. The cast includes New York Times best-selling author and Bible teacher Priscilla Shirer in her film debut, along with T.C. Stallings, Alex Kendrick, comedian Michael Jr., and Karen Abercrombie. It introduces newcomer Alena Pitts as Danielle and features a cameo by renowned Bible teacher and author Beth Moore in her first acting role. Provident Films and AFFIRM films are partnering with the Kendrick Brothers to release the film in theaters. Sony Pictures is again handling distribution.

Filmography

Book career

In addition to filmmaking, Kendrick has co-written five novels from his films, the last four of which became bestsellers. The first three were with his brother, Stephen, and novelist Eric Wilson. The fourth novel, Courageous, was written with Randy Alcorn. The fifth novel for the film The Lost Medallion, was written with Bill Muir. His book The Love Dare made The New York Times Paperback Advice & Misc. bestseller list for 131 weeks, reaching number-one twice. The Love Dare has sold over 5 million copies, with at least six million copies in print. In October 2011, the novel for Courageous was listed on The New York Times Best Seller list, along with his book The Resolution for Men, which was written with his brother, Stephen. In 2013, the brothers released "The Love Dare for Parents", which became a CBA Best Seller.

Charts

	 #7 non-fiction on Amazon.ca (Canadian).

	 #1 twice on the New York Times Best Seller list.


