
#Article: Joe McHugh
#Type: regular article

Joe McHugh (born 16 July 1971) is an Irish Fine Gael politician. He has been a Teachta Dála (TD) for the Donegal North-East constituency since May 2007.

Background and personal life

Born in Carrigart, County Donegal, McHugh was educated at Umlagh National School and the Loreto Convent, Milford. He attended the National University of Ireland, Maynooth, where he received an honours degree in economics and sociology, and a higher diploma in education. A keen sportsman, McHugh has been a member of the Carrigart Boxing Club, has played soccer in the Donegal League with Cranford F.C. and Bonagee United F.C., and has also been a Gaelic footballer. McHugh taught geography and mathematics at the Loreto Convent in Letterkenny from 1993 to 1995. From 1995-96 he taught A-level economics in Dubai, during which time he helped establish the first GAA club in the United Arab Emirates. In 1996, he returned to Ireland and became a youth worker in the Ballyboe area of Letterkenny. 

In July 2005, McHugh married Olwyn Enright, who served as a Fine Gael TD for Laois-Offaly from 2002 to 2011. They have two children.

Political career

Donegal County Council

Selected by Fine Gael to run for a Donegal County Council seat in the Milford Electoral area, McHugh was elected on 11 June 1999. In 2001, he introduced a motion to establish a youth council for the county, which led to the formation of the Donegal Youth Council, the first democratically elected youth forum in Ireland. He also worked closely with Young Fine Gael, helping to establish the first branch in the county in March 2004. While a member of the council, he was appointed chairman of the cross-border body ERNACT (European Region Network for the Application of Communications Technology), where he made the provision of broadband in border areas a priority. 

Seanad Éireann

He was elected to Seanad Éireann by the Administrative Panel in 2002, where he served as spokesperson on Community, Rural, Gaeltacht and Marine Affairs. McHugh set up a full-time constituency office in Letterkenny. When Fine Gael chose him as its Donegal North-East candidate for the Dáil, he moved into a new constituency office, which was officially opened by Fine Gael party leader Enda Kenny on 6 October 2006. 

Dáil Éireann

After a surprise poll-topping victory in Donegal North-East, where he captured 22.6 percent of the first preference vote, McHugh was elected to Dáil Éireann at the 2007 general election. His wife Olwyn Enright also won re-election to the Dáil, making them the third married couple to be elected to sit in the same Dáil. McHugh was appointed party deputy spokesperson for Foreign Affairs and the Department of the Taoiseach with special responsibility for North-South Co-operation in October 2007. McHugh was re-elected to the Dáil at the 2011 general election, attaining 19.3% of the first-preference vote.

In January 2011, McHugh called for a monument, funded by the government, in Donegal, dedicated to the founding of the Ulster Volunteer Force in 1912. McHugh was criticised by Eileen Doherty, a sister of Donegal County Councillor Eddie Fullerton, who was assassinated by loyalists in 1991. Doherty claimed McHugh and other Fine Gael councillors in Donegal had snubbed a number of commemorative events and opposed the building of a monument in Fullerton's memory in Buncrana. Fullerton was the third elected official in the Republic of Ireland to be assassinated. 

In Manchester in October 2011, McHugh became the first Fine Gael TD to address delegates from the British Conservative Party. He described it as an "opportunity."

On 15 July 2014, he was appointed as Minister of State with responsibility for Gaeltacht Affairs and Natural Resources at the Departments of Arts, Heritage and the Gaeltacht and Communications, Energy and Natural Resources. His appointment was met with criticism as his knowledge of the Irish language was at a basic level.

See also

	Families in the Oireachtas


