
#Article: Josh Stein
#Type: regular article

Josh Stein (born September 13, 1966) is a Democratic member of the North Carolina Senate representing District 16 (Wake County). Stein was sworn in for his first term on January 15, 2009. After being re-elected, he was elected minority whip by his colleagues in December 2010.

Josh Stein is married to Anna Harris Stein and has three children - Sam, Adam, and Leah. Stein graduated from Chapel Hill High School and lives in Raleigh. Stein earned his undergraduate degree at Dartmouth College and went on to Harvard Law School and the Kennedy School of Government. He has worked for the Self-Help Credit Union in Durham and the United States Senate. Prior to serving in the General Assembly, Stein spent eight years as North Carolina's Deputy Attorney General for Consumer Protection.

He announced in 2013 that he would run for re-election in 2014 and then for North Carolina Attorney General in 2016. His former boss, Attorney General Roy Cooper, is expected to run for Governor in 2016. In 2014, Stein was opposed by Republican Molotov Mitchell, who ran an "unusual" campaign - challenging Stein to push-ups and promising to "bounce" a National Security Agency-funded laboratory from the campus of North Carolina State University. Stein was re-elected in a landslide.

Legislative recognition

	Sierra Club of North Carolina named Stein a "2009 Environmental Champion of the North Carolina General Assembly" for his efforts to ban plastic bags on the Outer Banks and to clean up Falls Lake.

	North Carolina Association of Educators named him a "Rising Star" (2010)

	AARP Outstanding Legislator Award for Consumer Protection (2009)

	WakeUP Wake County Legislative Leadership Award (2009)

	North Carolina Sustainable Energy Association Legislator of the Year (2009)

	North Carolina Metropolitan Mayors Coalition Legislative Award (2009)

	The Conservation Council of North Carolina presented Josh its 2010 “Rising Star, Green Tie Award.”

	The NC Justice Center honored Josh as the 2011 “Defender of Justice” for his dedication to expanding opportunity and prosperity for and North Carolinians.

	Talking About Politics' Gary Pearce tapped Josh as the Democratic "MVP" for his "courage and conviction" and "political skills" during the 2013 long session.

	Equality NC selected Josh as the inaugural 2013 Jamie Kirk Hahn Ally Award for his longstanding efforts to enact the Nondiscrimination in State Employment Act.

	Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) honored Josh with its 2015 Legislator of the Year award for his work coauthoring legislation creating an all-offender ignition interlock law for anyone convicted of drunk driving.


