
#Article: Kathleen Matthews
#Type: regular article

Kathleen Ann Matthews (née Cunningham), born in Los Angeles, California, August 9, 1953, is the former chief communications and public affairs officer for Marriott International (NYSE:MAR), the leading global hotel company based in Bethesda, Maryland. Prior to joining Marriott International, she was a reporter for 25 years at WJLA-TV. She is a candidate for the U.S. House of Representatives for Maryland's 8th congressional district in the 2016 elections.

Personal

Matthews is a 1975 graduate of Stanford University. In 2004 she was Fellow at the Institute of Politics at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University. She has honorary degrees from the University of South Carolina and Chestnut Hill College in Philadelphia.

Since 1980 she has been married to Chris Matthews, host of Hardball and The Chris Matthews Show. They live in Chevy Chase, Maryland, and have three children: Michael(1983), Thomas(1986), Caroline(1989). Matthews is active in her community and industry, and has served on the boards of the U.S. Travel Association, Catholic Charities, the Black Student Fund, Suited for Change, Ford’s Theatre, Shakespeare Theatre Company, Nantucket Film Festival and Nantucket Dreamland Theater.

Journalism

Matthews began working at ABC's Washington DC affiliate WJLA in 1976 as a production assistant. She worked her way up to producer and then she was a writer/reporter from 1982-1991. In 1991 she began anchoring. She was an anchor for 15 years thru 2006 when she retired. She hosted and executive produced the nationally syndicated “Working Woman” television show from 2001-2006. She hosted political show capital Sunday on Sundays. She was named a 2002 Washingtonian of the Year by Washingtonian Magazine; and a “Woman Who Means Business” by the Washington Business Journal. She has also been awarded nine local Emmys and an Edward R Murrow award; among other top honors during her journalism career.

Currently

In July 2006 she was announced  as Marriott executive vice president - global communications and public affairs.

She is responsible for the company’s external and internal communications including global brand and corporate public relations, corporate social responsibility, and government affairs. She co-chairs Marriott’s Executive Green Council and serves on the U.S. Travel and Tourism Advisory Board to the Secretary of Commerce, as well as the boards of the U.S. Travel Association, the International Tourism Partnership, and the Economic Club of Washington. She is also currently active in the World Economic Forum Policy Councils.

In 2011, Matthews launched her blog “Do a Latte” chronicling her travels across the globe. Matthews’s blog provides insight into her work with Marriott, philanthropic efforts, and personal world.

Campaign for Congress

On March 5, 2015, Politico's Mike Allen reported that Matthews will run for Congress in Maryland's 8th congressional district, where incumbent Chris Van Hollen is giving up his House seat to run for the United States Senate.


