
#Article: Karl Stefanovic
#Type: regular article

Karl Stefanovic (born 12 August 1974) is an Australian Gold Logie-winning television presenter. Stefanovic is currently a co-host of the Nine Network's breakfast program, Today.

Career

Early years

Stefanovic was born in Darlinghurst, New South Wales to a Serbian-German father and an Australian mother. His younger brother is Channel 9's Foreign Correspondent Peter Stefanovic. He was educated at St Augustines College in Cairns, Anglican Church Grammar School and the Queensland University of Technology, where he graduated with a degree in journalism in 1994. After university he began working for WIN Television in Rockhampton and Cairns as a cadet reporter. In 1996, Stefanovic took up a position with TVNZ as a reporter for One Network News in New Zealand.

In 1998, Stefanovic returned to Australia with a job reporting and presenting for Ten News in Brisbane, and also acted as a fill-in news presenter for Ron Wilson in Sydney.

Nine Network

In 2000, Stefanovic moved to the Nine Network as a reporter and back-up presenter for National Nine News in Brisbane. He received a Queensland Media Award for Best News Coverage for his report on the Childers backpacker hostel fire in 2000.

Stefanovic's reports on the 2001 Warragamba bushfires from Sussex Inlet in January 2002 led to his appointment to Nine's Sydney newsroom, and he was involved in the coverage of the 2003 Canberra bushfires.

In 2003, Stefanovic was posted to Los Angeles as one of the Nine Network's US correspondents.

In February 2005, Stefanovic replaced long-running Today host Steve Liebmann and currently co-hosts the program with Lisa Wilkinson. Stefanovic has been a fill-in host on A Current Affair for Tracy Grimshaw.

In 2006, Stefanovic participated in the Nine Network reality television show Torvill and Dean's Dancing on Ice. He eventually made it to the grand final of the show, but was beaten by Jake Wall by a viewer poll.

Since 2008, Stefanovic has been host of the Nine Network's Carols by Candlelight with Lisa Wilkinson replacing longtime host Ray Martin.

In 2011, along with his hosting role at Today, he is a contributing reporter on 60 Minutes. More recently, Stefanovic began hosting a Sunday evening edition of A Current Affair (ACA Sunday). In December 2011 Stefanovic was a crew member aboard racing supermaxi yacht Investec LOYAL when it won line honours in the 2011 Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race.

Stefanovic also hosted the Nine Network's evening reports on the 2012 London Olympics.

In December 2013, Stefanovic was a crew member aboard racing supermaxi yacht Perpetual Loyal in the 2013 Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race, with his other celebrity crew members, Larry Emdur, Guillaume Brahimi, Tom Slingsby, Phil Waugh and Jude Bolton.

In October 2015, Stefanovic hosted television panel show The Verdict on the Nine Network. The weekly show mixed elements of successful programs The Project and Q&A but courted controversy with its line-up of panelists. 

Filmography

Awards

At the 2011 Logie Awards, Stefanovic won two awards - the Gold Logie for Most Popular Personality, and the Silver Logie for Most Popular Presenter.

Trivia

On November 15, 2014, Stefanovic revealed in an interview with Fairfax Media that he had been wearing the same suit on-air every day for a year, "except for a couple of times because of circumstance," as what he claimed to be an experiment in sexism. He claims that, while his female colleagues receive regular criticism for whatever they wear, nobody noticed his outfit the whole time. Stefanovic did, however, vary his ties and shirts a lot more regularly than his suit.


