
#Article: Keith L. T. Wright
#Type: regular article

Keith L. T. Wright (born January 3, 1955) is an American politician and a member of the New York State Assembly. He was first elected to the assembly in 1992 and has been reelected ever since. In early 2007, he proposed a bill limiting retail sale of violent video games for individuals below 18 years of age. This proposed law stirred up controversy and protest amongst gamer communities. Wright is also the author of the bill to apologize for African slavery in New York, which was second only to South Carolina in the American slave trade, the first Northern State make such an apology. Wright is also credited with coining the term "super-duper Tuesday" in response to the shifting of New York's election primary date to the 5th of February. This is now the common terminology for the change of dates nationwide.

Prior career

Upon graduating from the Fieldston School, Wright attended Tufts University where he made the Dean's Honor List. He received his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1977 and continued his educational career, obtaining a Juris Doctor from Rutgers University. 

Prior to his election to the Assembly, Wright was an associate in the Law Office of Ruffin E. Cotton, Jr., specializing in corporate and securities law. 

In 1983, he joined the staff of the Human Resources Administration (HRA) as Special Assistant to the General Counsel. He served in this capacity until 1986, leaving the HRA to assume a key position, Director of the Uptown Office, on the staff of then-Manhattan Borough President David Dinkins. 

Following Dinkins' successful bid for office of Mayor for the City of New York, Wright left city government for the position of Assistant Director of Government Relations at the New York City Transit Authority. 

Wright's father was also politically active. He was New York State Supreme Court Justice Bruce M. Wright. Wright is married to the former Susan I. Gayles and they have two sons, Keith "Jared" and Jordan.

Current status

Assemblyman Wright is a respected leader in the State Democratic party and Chair of the New York State Assembly Housing Committee. During his tenure in the Assembly he has also chaired key committees in the Assembly including; election law, social services and labor. He has proven himself to be a true champion for civil rights and social justice having sponsored key legislation to create affordable housing, raise the minimum wage and strengthen the state’s wage and hour laws to provide essential protections for the hardworking men and women of New York State. 

Assemblyman Wright’s priorities cover a wide variety of issues, among them: the DREAM Act; improving access to historically underrepresented industries for women and minorities, raising the age of criminal responsibility so that 16- and 17-year-olds will no longer be inappropriately prosecuted as adults in New York Stat and expanding access to quality education for all children. As member of the Correction Committee and the Task Force on Criminal Justice Reform, Wright is a strong opponent of the death penalty and the Rockefeller Drug Laws. He is a strong advocate for criminal justice reform and following the Alberta Spruill incident, a case of mistaken identity that led to death when police stormed the wrong apartment, Wright introduced legislation that attempted reform "no knock" search warrants. 

The Assemblyman has earned a reputation for getting results for his constituents and for improving the quality of life for New Yorkers across the state. This results driven approach led to his being named co-chair of the New York State Democratic Party in 2012.  Assemblyman Wright is a lifelong resident of Harlem and an active community member. 

See also

	List of members of the New York State Assembly


