
#Article: Keith Larson
#Type: regular article

Keith Larson is an American radio host and conservative, political commentator. His talk show, The Keith Larson Show, airs 9 a.m. to noon each weekday on WBT AM/FM in Charlotte. Larson was informed by WBT in April 2012 that his contract would not be renewed.

Early life/professional career

Larson was born in Chicago, Illinois. Before working at WBT, he spent 12 years in advertising; 10 with McDonald's Corporation and 2 years as an advertising executive.

The Keith Larson Show

Larson's radio show airs weekdays for three hours daily, beginning at 9 a.m. Eastern time. He describes his program's goal of holding local politicians accountable, as well as its free-flowing and, at times, offbeat nature (interviewing not only newsmakers, but other people of interest ranging from Bigfoot hunters to snake and reptile experts), as "giving a little poke in the eye wherever it's deserved; making a little trouble for the people in charge, whoever's in charge; hanging out with some friends; talking to some folk; playing some tunes; and having a little fun". He is considered to be witty and honest in his view of local and regional politics.

8th District congressional election

During the 2010 Republican presidential primary for the 8th congressional district Larson feuded with both Tim D'Annunzio (R) and Harold Johnson (R). Larson brought both on his radio program, and refused to endorse either; his interviews with Tim D'Annunzio were particularly contentious. Larson threatened legal action when D'Annunzio used a sound bite of Larson asking Harold Johnson a question in a radio advertisement; D'Annunzio later replaced Larson's voice. D'Annunzio accused Larson of being the radio narrator on Harold Johnson's radio commercials, despite a lack of similarity in voice. He also accused Larson of running a 'smear campaign' responsible for his drop in the polls, saying "This is what your show does to people" and "You're probably going to hell someday for doing this.... There's a special place in hell for people like you." This led Larson to decry D'Annunzio as a "delusional, deranged human being". The interview that Larson had with D'Annunzio has been removed from the archives of the News-Talk 1110 WBT website.

On August 23, 2011 Keith Larson interviewed Vernon Robinson as he was running for Congress in the 8th district. During the interview Larson asked Robinson when he relocated to Concord, North Carolina, if he was going to take up permanent residence there, and if he was moving to the city for the sole purpose of running for the congressional seat. Robinson became noticeably nervous and elusive when answering Larson's questions. In response to Robinson's behavior Larson criticized him on his apprehensiveness and indirect answers.

Larson has also brought Libertarian Party candidate Thomas Hill on his program.

Personal

He lives in Waxhaw, North Carolina with his wife, Nancy, and his two daughters. Larson contributes to the community, most visibly with the annual "Ride for the Kids" motorcycle rally benefiting one or more local children with a serious illness. He also brings visibility and participates in events benefiting the March 4th with Hope Foundation and the Zach Ramsey Children's Cancer Fund.


