
#Article: Kwabena Duffuor
#Type: regular article

Kwabena Duffuor was the Finance Minister of Ghana. He has also served as the Governor of the Bank of Ghana and as the Governor of the Central Bank of Ghana . He was named as one of the four best Central Bank Governors in the World at an IMF/World Bank meeting in 1999.

He is a Fellow of the Akuafo Hall, University of Ghana, and a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Bankers.

Duffuor is the founder and senior advisor to HODA Holdings.

Early life and education

Kwabena Duffuor had his secondary education at the Prempeh College at Kumasi in the Ashanti Region of Ghana. He proceeded to the University of Ghana where he graduated in 1968 with a B. Sc. degree in Economics. His prostgraduate studies were at the Syracuse University in New York, United States where he obtained a Masters in Business Administration degree in Finance and Banking and Master of Arts in Economics in 1975. He was also awarded a Doctorate of Philosophy in International Finance in 1979 at the same university.

Career

He started work with the Ghana Commercial Bank in 1969 where he rose to become Chief Economist and Head of Research Department. Between 1982 and 1991, Duffuor worked full-time as a banker. He also worked as a part-time lecturer in Economics, Finance and Banking at the Economics Department and the School of Administration at the University of Ghana. He was appointed an External Examiner in Finance from 1985 at the University. In 1995, he became Deputy Governor of the Bank of Ghana. In July 1997, President Jerry Rawlings appointed Duffuor as the Governor of the Bank of Ghana. He held this position till his four years term ended in September 2001. He was nominated Ghana's man of the year by the readers of The Independent newspaper.

Politics

Kwabena Duffuor is a member of the Convention People's Party. He was appointed as Finance Minister in John Atta Mills's National Democratic Congress government in February 2009.

See also

	List of Mills government ministers


