
#Article: Peter Ramsauer
#Type: regular article

Peter Ramsauer (born 10 February 1954) is a German politician of the Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) who served as the Federal Minister of Transport, Building and Urban Development in the Second Merkel cabinet. He has been described as the self-appointed "shepherd" of the German language; seeking to purify it especially of English loanwords.

Early life and education

Ramsauer was born in the Upper Bavarian village of Traunwalchen, since 1978 part of Traunreut. He completed his Abitur at the Staatliches Landschulheim Marquartstein gymnasium in 1973 and studied business economics at the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, where he obtained his Diploma in 1979 and his PhD in 1985. Ramsauer has also qualified as a professional miller in accordance with the traditional occupation of his ancestry. 

He is married and has four daughters. His wife Susanne is a cousin of American actress Sandra Bullock. Ramsauer is also a competent pianist.

Political career

Ramsauer joined the conservative Young Union (JU) youth organisation in 1972 and the CSU in 1973. He was elected Bavarian vice chairman of the JU in 1983 and vice chairman of the CSU in 2008.

In 1978 Ramsauer obtained a seat in the municipal diet (Stadtrat) of Traunreut and in 1984 became a member of the district assembly of Traunstein. He ran successfully in the 1990 federal election and has been a member of the Bundestag parliament since then, from 1998 to 2005 as CSU Chief Whip of the CDU/CSU parliamentary group. In the recent 2009 election Ramsauer was re-elected by 54.6% of the votes cast.

On 29 October 2009 Ramsauer was appointed Federal Minister of Transport, Building and Urban Development at the behest of Chancellor Angela Merkel, succeeding Wolfgang Tiefensee.

Political positions

Economic policy

In 2010, in his capacity as transport minister, Ramsauer rejected plans for an initial public offering of rail operator Deutsche Bahn, arguing that the company first needed to focus on improving quality, security, cleanliness, punctuality and reliability of its trains.

In 2014, Ramsauer publicly criticized France for announcing plans to buy a 20 percent stake in Alstom despite its heavy debts and budget deficit and accused the country’s government of showing "ice-cold" national interests in choosing U.S. firm General Electric over German Siemens for an alliance with Alstom.

Energy policy

Amid a 2014 debate over whether Germany needs to rethink its energy strategy and reduce its dependence on Russian gas imports due to the Ukrainian crisis, Ramsauer spoke in favor of considering importing shale gas from the United States, or alternative embracing "domestic resources". 

European integration

On January 27, 2015, Ramsauer voted against the Merkel government’s proposal for a four-month extension of Greece's bailout; in doing so, he joined a record number of 29 dissenters from the CDU/CSU parliamentary group who expressed skepticism about whether the Greek government under Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras could be trusted to deliver on its reform pledges.

Controversy

During a ballot in Bundestag on 17 October 1991, Ramsauer voted against officially accepting the current Oder-Neisse line as the final Polish-German Frontier.


