
#Article: Dana White
#Type: regular article

Dana Frederick White, Jr. (born July 28, 1969) is an American businessman, entrepreneur, and the President of the mixed martial arts organization Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC).

Early life

Dana Frederick White, Jr. was born to Dana White, Sr. and June White on July 28, 1969 in Manchester, Connecticut. White and his sister Kelly were raised by his mother and her family the majority of his childhood. Dana is Irish-American. He began boxing at age 17 and graduated from Hermon High School in Maine in 1987.

Career

Ultimate Fighting Championship (2001-present)

While working as a manager for Tito Ortiz and Chuck Liddell, White learned that Semaphore Entertainment Group, the parent company of the UFC, was looking for a buyer for the UFC. White contacted childhood friend Lorenzo Fertitta, an executive at Station Casinos and a former commissioner of the Nevada State Athletic Commission. Within a month, Lorenzo and his older brother Frank bought the UFC with White installed as its president. White owns 9% of Zuffa, LLC, the entity the Fertitta brothers created to own and manage the UFC.

Feuds

Bob Arum

In 2007, White accused Top Rank Boxing Promoter, Bob Arum of "sucking the life out of the sport (boxing) and not putting anything back in." Amongst White's criticisms were that Arum had created a weak undercard for the Oscar De La Hoya vs. Floyd Mayweather superfight in 2007 by not promoting the show correctly. "He promoted that show completely the wrong way, because he worried about the money as opposed to trying to secure the future", White said. "He should have stacked that card. He should have had Shane Mosley and Bernard Hopkins and  Barrera and Winky Wright on there and used it to show that boxing is back." Arum responded by saying that MMA fighters need to examine the revenues being generated and ask why the UFC was not paying them more. White has also said that Arum is the "Dumbest promoter in the history of the world", an "idiot" and a "moron". Arum retorted that MMA fighters are "guys rolling around like homosexuals on the ground." Earlier in the year, Arum described UFC President Dana White as "nuts" and "a little too much of a loose cannon."

Randy Couture

White and former UFC Light Heavyweight and Heavyweight champion Randy Couture have had some controversy. White stated in an interview that he has "no respect for Couture, not even a little. The only time when he's ever a man is when he steps in that cage." He stated that Couture "Lied to me, not even to my face, not over the phone, but through text" about Couture doing a deal with Spike and Bellator.

Tito Ortiz

Among White's many feuds, his most publicized has been his feud with former UFC Light Heavyweight Champion and UFC Hall of Famer Tito Ortiz. Their feud began soon after White became president of the UFC when he told Ortiz he could no longer be his manager. Ortiz felt betrayed. Ortiz then stated that White "Never did anything for him," and White stated he did not get paid "a fucking dime." Their feud got to the point to where the two agreed to fight in a three-round exhibition boxing match. Eventually, Ortiz pulled out of the match by not showing up the day of the weigh-ins. In 2014, White even stated in an interview that "I used to beat the living shit out of Tito Ortiz."

In 2008, At the weigh ins for UFC 84 Ortiz wore a T-shirt saying "Dana is my Bitch." White also stated in an interview that Ortiz is the "Cheapest Motherfucker on the planet Earth." In 2013, Ortiz called White a "Slave master" and White responded by stating that Ortiz was a "Fucking buffoon" and "One of the dumbest motherfuckers you'll ever meet." In 2014, Ortiz accused the UFC of "Erasing my legacy," after his record of 15 wins was revised and Jon Jones was named the record holder for most wins in the light heavyweight weight class. Ortiz referenced the personal dispute with White as a reason for the revision, and he furthered his attacks on White with allegations of steroid use.

Ken Shamrock

White had been very vocal about his dislike of former UFC Openweight Champion Ken Shamrock. Shamrock had been known to ally himself with other fight promotions competing with the UFC, have litigious contract disputes with White, and take issues with White personally. There was also one point when Shamrock filed a lawsuit against White, in which the judge ruled in the UFC's favor. White stated that Shamrock owes him money for that lawsuit and stated that he had done so much for the former UFC great and felt the MMA legend was ungrateful for his efforts.

Charity work

In December 2010, White donated $50,000 to the Francisco Espinoza foundation. White donated approximately $8,000 to help pay for the brain tumor treatment of a two-year-old British girl, Ruby Owen. The young girl's family had described themselves as being "shocked and over the moon". Ruby Owen's uncle, being a UFC fan had contacted White via email and asked if he could help by donating to the Ruby Owen fund raising website. White and Owen have never officially met. He gave $300 to one man who said that he "just received a speeding ticket while racing across town to meet him". Shortly after being named 2009 Nevada Sportsman of the Year, White added $100,000 from his pocket to the $250,000 total raised for the fund raising marathon sponsored by ESPN Radio 1100 for Las Vegas.

Filmography

Television

Personal life

He is an atheist.

In May 2012, White revealed that he had been diagnosed with Ménière's disease. The UFC on Fuel TV 3: "Korean Zombie vs. Poirier" event was to be the first he had missed in 11 years with White staying home as per doctors orders. White is undergoing Orthokine treatment for Ménière's disease which he says has greatly reduced his symptoms.

Accomplishments

	Nevada Sportsman of the Year (2009)

	Wrestling Observer Newsletter Awards

	Promoter of the Year (2005-2013/present)

	World MMA Awards

	Leading Man of the Year 2014

	Leading Man of the Year 2013

	Leading Man of the Year 2012

	Leading Man of the Year 2011

	Leading Man of the Year 2010

	Armed Forces Foundation

	Patriot Award

	MMAInsider.net

	Lifetime Achievement Award (2013 Awards Year)

	MMA Freak

	MMA Freak Hall of Fame Class of 2013


