
#Article: Luther Strange
#Type: regular article

Luther Johnson Strange, III (born March 1, 1953), is the 49th Attorney General of the U.S. state of Alabama.  Strange was a candidate for public office in both 2006 and 2010.  In 2006, Strange ran for Lieutenant Governor of Alabama and defeated George Wallace, Jr. in the Republican primary. Strange then lost the general election to Democrat Jim Folsom, Jr.. In 2010, Strange defeated incumbent Attorney General Troy King in the Republican primary, before going on to win the general election on November 2, 2010, against Democrat James Anderson. 

Personal life

Luther Strange was born in Birmingham, Alabama, and lived in Sylacauga until the age of six, when his family moved to Homewood. Strange is an Eagle Scout.

Strange graduated from Shades Valley High School in 1970. He earned his undergraduate degree from Tulane University in New Orleans, Louisiana, and then his Juris Doctor in 1979 from Tulane University Law School. Strange was admitted to the Alabama State Bar in 1981. 

Prior to being elected Attorney General, Strange was the founder of the law firm Strange LLC., based in Birmingham. Prior to founding his firm, he was a partner with Bradley Arant Boult Cummings LLP.

In December 2011, Strange was honored as a Distinguished Eagle Scout, by the Boy Scouts of America.

Strange and his family reside in Mountain Brook, a suburb of Birmingham. He and his wife, Melissa, have two sons.

Career as Attorney General

In March 2014, Strange brought Alabama into a lawsuit filed by Missouri Attorney General Chris Koster against California's egg production standards as embodied in Prop 2. In October 2014, a federal judge dismissed the lawsuit, rejecting the states' challenge to Proposition 2, California's prohibition on the sale of eggs laid by caged hens kept in conditions more restrictive than those approved by California voters in a 2008 ballot initiative. Judge Kimberly Mueller ruled that Alabama and the other states lacked legal standing to sue on behalf of their residents and that the plaintiffs were representing solely the interests of egg farmers, not "a substantial statement of their populations." 


