
#Article: Mahira Khan
#Type: regular article

Mahira Khan (born as Mahira Hafeez Khan; 21 December 1984) is a Pakistani actress and former VJ. Noted for playing a variety of characters in a range of film genre and serials-from contemporary social to romantic dramas—Khan has received two Lux Style Awards. Through her career, Khan has become one of Pakistan's highest-paid actresses and one of the most popular and high-profile celebrities in Pakistan.

Khan made her screen debut with a supporting role in the 2011 social drama Bol, which rank among sixth highest-grossing Pakistani film of all the time. Her performance in the film garnered critical appreciation and earned her the Lux Style Award for Best Film Actress nomination. In 2014, she featured in the romantic film Bin Roye. She played a leading role in the Pakistani dramas Humsafar (2012), Shehr-e-Zaat (2012) and Sadqay Tumhare (2014).

Career

Khan began her career as a VJ when she was 16 years old. Khan hosted the live show Most Wanted three days a week on MTV Pakistan, and she then hosted Weekends with Mahira on Aag TV. In 2013, she hosted 1st Hum Awards with Mikaal Zulfiqar.

Khan participated in the opening of PFDC-The Boulevard for Pakistani designer wear in India. She has walked the ramp for fashion designer Deepak Perwani. Since then she has appeared in fashion shows for numerous designers.

In 2011, Khan made her film debut with Bol directed by Shoaib Mansoor, produced by Shamoon Abbasi, which was the first highest-grossing Pakistani film of all time. Khan played the role of (Ayesha, a feisty tomboy) who is harassed by her father and marries a Shia Muslim boy without telling her father.

Taran Adarsh said, "Mahira dont get much scope and she is strictly okay, her screen space is limited to a few sequence and two songs". NDTV Movies described Khan as "Mahira and Atif is in love with each other was terribly tragic consequence". Komal Nahta of Koimoi added that "Mahira and Humaima played the role of girls who wants to lead a life of respect and honor, who were born in an orthodox family, which is undoubtedly the best." Khan went on to nominate for Lux Style Award for Best Actress.

In 2011, she appeared in television program  Humsafar, for which she received positive reviews. Humsafar was also telecased in India Khan states that she is selective with her work and reviews a script closely before deciding to accept, regardless of whether the project is in Pakistan or outside of the country, so that she can spend time with her son.

She began shooting for Asim Razas upcoming film Ho Mann Jahaan 2014. Khan appears in Raees an upcoming Indian crime film directed by Rahul Dholakia.

Personal life

Khan is married to Ali Askari, who had attended college with her in Los Angeles. The ceremony took place on 13 July 2007. During an interview on The Reham Khan Show, Mahira stated that her parents are Urdu-speaking Pathans. Her father was born in Delhi, British India (now India).

Filmography

Television

	2006 MTV's Most Wanted as Host

	2008 Weekends with Mahira as Host

	2011 Neeyat as Aalia

	 2011 Humsafar as Khirad Ehsan

	 2012 Shehr-e-Zaat as Falak

	2013 1st Hum Awards as Host

	2013 Coke Kahani as Herself 

	2014 TUC The Lighter Side of Life as Host

	2014 Sadqay Tumhare as Shaanu

See also

	 List of Pakistani actresses

	 List of Pakistani models


