
#Article: Man Singh Tyagi
#Type: regular article

Man Singh Taygi (मान सिंह त्यागी) better known as M. S. Tyagi is a retired professor of Electrical Engineering form Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur.

Early life and education

Born in village Rohana Kalan of the Muzaffarnagar district of the Indian state Uttar Pradesh. Professor Tyagi received his MSc degree in Physics from University of Lucknow, India and the Dr.-Ing degree in Electrical Engineering from RWTH Aachen University, West Germany, in 1966.

Career

Professor Tyagi's started his career as a researcher at Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute, Pilani. After CEERI, Pilani he moved to West Germany to pursue his Doctorate from RWTH Aachen University. At RWTH, he enrolled his Dr.-Ing (German doctorate degree in engineering) degree in Electrical Engineering. During his Doctorate studies at RWTH, he were employed as a laboratory development Engineer by Telefunken AG, Ulm, Germany, from 1962-1964. In year 1966, he finished his Dr.-Ing degree with thesis entitled: About the breakthrough behaviour of silicon diodes. From 1967-1968, he held a Postdoctoral teaching fellowship at University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada and during 1968-1969 he was a Research Scientist at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, US.

Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur were established in 1959 with consortium of nine leading USA research universities as part of the Kanpur Indo-American Programme (KIAP). He was invited by Indian Government to join IIT, Kanpur as a faculty. In 1969 he joined the Electrical Engineering department of the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, as an Assistant Professor and became a Professor in 1977. At Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur he has been mainly responsible for the development of the Semiconductor Devices Laboratory. Since February 1980, he has been a Visiting Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering ESAT Laboratory, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, on leave of absence from IIT, Kanpur. After retiring from Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur as a Professor of Electrical Engineering, he joined Electrical Engineering and Electronics Engineering department of the Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani as a Professor. In July 2003, he joined Electronics and Communications Engineering department of Jaypee Institute of Information Technology, Noida. He was also a visiting Professor at Centre for Development of Advanced Computing, Noida.

Books

Professor Tyagi wrote one internationally acclaimed book Introduction to Semiconductor Materials and Devices, which is widely used in Electrical Engineering, semiconductor devices and material science undergraduate and postgraduate courses. It was published by John Wiley & Sons on 7 March 1991.

	 M. S. Tyagi: Introduction to Semiconductor Materials and Devices. John Wiley & Sons. 311-320 (1991). ISBN 0-471-60560-3 

	 Physics of Schottky Barrier Junction (first chapter in book Metal-semiconductor Schottky barrier junctions and their applications by B. L. Sharma, PlenumPress, NewYork (1984))

Publications

He has contributed the first chapter in Metal-semiconductor Schottky barrier junctions and their applications, Plenum Press New York 1984.

Professional membership

Professor Tyagi is a life fellow of IETE, Semiconductor society of India and Indian Society for Technical Education.


