
#Article: Manjula Ghattamaneni
#Type: regular article

Manjula Swaroop (మంజుల స్వరూప్) (née Ghattamaneni; born 1970), better known as Manjula, is an Indian film producer and actress known for her work in Telugu Cinema. Born to prominent Telugu actor Krishna Ghattamaneni, she began her acting career by doing a cameo role in the 1999 film Rajasthan and went on to act as a lead actress in a Malayalam film, Summer in Bethlehem. She found fame by starring and producing in the 2002 film, Show. The film won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Telugu and National Film Award for Best Screenplay for that year. She owns a film production company called Indira Productions, named after her mother.

Personal life

She is the daughter and third child of veteran actor Krishna Ghattamaneni and Indira Devi. She has two brothers and two sisters. Her elder brother, Ramesh Babu is also a film producer and her younger brother, Mahesh Babu is a popular Telugu actor. Manjula is married to producer & actor Sanjay Swaroop. They have a daughter named Jhanavi. She is known to be good friends with her sister-in-law Namrata Shirodkar.

Career

She began her career doing by a cameo as a terrorist in R. K. Selvamani's Rajasthan. She also acted as one of the female leads in 1998 Malayalam film Summer in Bethlehem starring Suresh Gopi and Jayaram. When Manjula began her career, she faced an unfavorable response from her father's fans as they did not want her to act.

In 2002, she produced and starred in the film Show. Directed by Neelakanta, the film won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Telugu.

Her second production venture was Naani (2004), directed by S.J. Suryaah. The movie starred her brother and actor Mahesh Babu. The movie failed to do well at Boxoffice. In 2006 she co-produced her third movie Pokiri, an action blockbuster with Puri Jagannath. The movie was a blockbuster hit and was the highest grossing movie in Telugu film industry of the time.

In 2009, she returned to acting with her next production venture Kavya's Diary. In 2010, she along with her husband produced Ye Maaya Chesave, a romantic love story with Naga Chaitanya under Gautham Menon's direction. The movie got critical acclaim and was declared a hit at the box office. The same year she also appeared in the movie Orange alongside her husband sanjay swaroop.

Awards

	National Film Awards

	2003 - National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Telugu (Producer) - Show

	Nandi Awards

	2006 - Nandi Award for Best Popular Feature Film - (Co-producer) - Pokiri

Filmography

As Producer

As Actor


