
#Article: Christopher Wilkinson
#Type: regular article

Christopher Wilkinson (born March 29, 1950) is an American screenwriter, producer, and director. He was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay for Nixon (1995). He also wrote the screenplays for Ali (2001) and Copying Beethoven (2006), the latter of which he also produced. His scripts are often historically based.

Early life

Wilkinson was born in New York City and raised in Philadelphia. He began his career as a musician before attending film school at Temple University.

Career

Wilkinson starting out his career writing, producing and directing industrials, commercials and documentaries in Philadelphia and New York, while also working as a cameraman for ESPN, CBS Sports and EUE/Screen Gems. His documentaries from this time include Engine 2, Ladder 3, Echoes and One in Ten, all of which appeared on PBS. These films won awards at the Chicago International Film Festival, the New York Film Festival, and CINE (among others).

Wilkinson has written several biopics with frequent writing partner Stephen J. Rivele, starting with 1995's Nixon, directed by Oliver Stone and starring Anthony Hopkins, about the life of president Richard Nixon. Ali (2001), directed by Michael Mann and starring Will Smith, details Muhammad Ali's boxing career and soul-searching struggles. Copying Beethoven (2006) dramatized the last years of Ludwig van Beethoven's life as he became increasingly isolated, struggled with deafness and was scorned by the public. Wilkinson also produced the film, which was directed by Agnieszka Holland and starred Ed Harris. In 2008, he and Rivele did script work on Moneyball (2011). He was a writer and executive producer on Pawn Sacrifice (2014), Miles Ahead (2015), and wrote and directed the PBS film, Virtuosity (2015).

Wilkinson worked on the screenplays for Mercury, a biopic about Queen lead singer Freddie Mercury, who died of complications from AIDS in 1991, the long-planned Tupac, based on the final days of rapper Tupac Shakur, who was killed in a Las Vegas drive-by shooting in 1996, and Birth of the Dragon, Bruce Lee origin story inspired by the real-life no-rules fight between Lee and Chinese kung fu master Wong Jack Man.

He is a member of the DGA, WGA and SAG.

Personal life

Wilkinson resides in Los Angeles, California, with his son. He was formerly married to cartoonist Cathy Guisewite (creator of the comic strip Cathy), with whom he has a daughter.

Filmography


