
#Article: Marc Lasry
#Type: regular article

Marc Lasry is a billionaire Moroccan-born American hedge fund manager. He is the co-founder and chief executive officer (CEO) of Avenue Capital Group and the co-owner of the NBA's Milwaukee Bucks.

Early life and education

Lasry was born in Marrakech to a family of Moroccan Jews. When he was seven years old, he and his family immigrated to the U.S. His father, Moise, was a computer programmer and his mother, Elise, was a schoolteacher. Lasry grew up in West Hartford, Connecticut and received a B.A. in history from Clark University in 1981 and a J.D. from New York Law School in 1984. While in law school, he worked as a clerk for the Chief Bankruptcy Judge of the Southern District of New York, Edward Ryan.

Career

After graduating from law school, Lasry took a position in the bankruptcy branch of the law firm Angel & Frankel.  Together with his sister Sonia Gardner, they founded Amroc Investments in 1989 and Avenue Capital Group in 1995. One year later Lasry became the director of the private debt department at the investment firm R. D. Smith, now Smith Vasillou Management. This is where Lasry first got involved in trade claims. He then took a position as Co-Director of the Bankruptcy and Corporate Reorganization Department at Cowen & Company. There Lasry recruited his sister Sonia Gardner, also an attorney, to assist in the company's trade claims department. Lasry left Cowen & Company and joined the Robert M. Bass Group, focused on distressed security investments.

In 1989, Lasry and his sister founded the firm Amroc Investments with $100 million in seed money from various investors. Amroc purchased both trade claims and bank debt held by vendors of bankrupt and/or distressed companies. In 1995, Lasry and Gardner invested $7 million of their own capital and founded the Avenue Capital Group, which initially focused on distressed debt and special situations primarily in the United States. The partners successfully expanded the firm's investment focus to Europe and Asia. The two went on to build their hedge fund, which had as much as $11 billion in assets under management.

In 2013, Lasry was considered for the position of U.S. ambassador to France, but declined consideration for business reasons. In 2014 Forbes listed Lasry as one of the 25 highest-earning hedge fund managers in 2013, with total earnings of $280 million. 

In April 2014, Lasry became co-owner of the NBA's Milwaukee Bucks after purchasing the team from Herb Kohl for $550 million. 

In Oct 2015, while being interviewed on Bloomberg with David Westin and Stephanie Ruble, Marc Lasry said that the US economy is “doing great” compared to economies in the rest of the world. He said, "Having more stimulus isn’t what we need. You need to get back to a little more normality." He continued, "If I were an equity investor, I would be an investor in the U.S."

Lasry is a member of Kappa Beta Phi.

Philanthropy

In 2004, Lasry and his wife contributed support to the University of Pennsylvania and co-chaired the Penn Parent Leadership Committee. In 2005 they donated $5 million to Clark University for the construction of the “Cathy '83 and Marc '81 Lasry Center for Bioscience”.

Lasry served as a director of the 92nd Street Y and the Big Apple Circus and was a trustee of the Mount Sinai Medical Center. He is a prominent donor to Democratic Party causes.

Personal life

Lasry is married to Cathy Cohen and has five children. His son, Alexander, worked for White House Senior Adviser Valerie Jarrett. Lasry's daughter, Samantha, was a staffer for congressman Rahm Emanuel.

Lasry's hobbies include basketball, tennis and comics.


