
#Article: Mark J. F. Schroeder
#Type: regular article

Mark J. F. Schroeder (born December 13, 1955) is a Democratic politician who currently serves as the comptroller for the city of Buffalo, New York.

Schroeder was raised in South Buffalo, where he attended Public School #72, St. Thomas Aquinas School, and Bishop Timon High School. He received an A.A.S. degree from Erie Community College in 1976 and a B.S. degree from Empire State College in 1982. Prior to being elected comptroller, he served as a member of the New York State Assembly, representing portions of the cities of Buffalo and Lackawanna, as well as the entire towns of West Seneca and Orchard Park.

Erie County Legislature

In 2001, Schroeder ran for an open seat in the Erie County Legislature. As a County Legislator, he started the Greater South Buffalo Chamber of Commerce, which currently has more than 200 members and holds several community events every year. That same year, Schroeder founded the South Buffalo Education Center, which offers G.E.D. classes and computer and vocational training, helping more than 500 students receive their GEDs since 2002.

New York State Assembly

Schroeder was first elected to the Assembly in November 2004 and he was re-elected in November 2006. He won the November 2008 general election with 75 percent of the vote and ran uncontested in the November 2010 general election.

In 2010, Schroeder indicated he would not vote for Sheldon Silver as Speaker of the New York State Assembly, although both are Democrats.

Committee assignments

	Committee on Mental Health

	Chair, Subcommittee on Autism Retention

	Committee on Insurance

	Committee on Local Governments

	Committee on Oversight, Analysis, and Investigation

	Committee on Small Business

	Committee on Veterans' Affairs

Buffalo City Comptroller

In June 2011, he expressed interest in running for the position of Buffalo City Comptroller, which had been recently vacated by Andrew SanFilippo when he was appointed New York State Deputy Comptroller. He was expected to face opposition in a Democratic primary from Erie County Legislature Majority Leader Maria Whyte, but she withdrew from the race to instead run in a special election for Erie County Clerk. In November 2011, Schroeder was elected Buffalo City Comptroller, he was unopposed. 

Personal life

Schroeder resides in South Buffalo with his wife, Kate (née Horan), and their three children.


