
#Article: Mark Benton
#Type: regular article

Mark Benton (born 16 November 1965) is an English actor, best known for his role in the long-running Nationwide Building Society advertisements, but also known for his roles as Eddie in Early Doors, Howard in Northern Lights and Martin Pond in Barbara. Benton has also starred in BBC One drama, Waterloo Road as maths teacher, Daniel Chalk from 2011 to 2013 and again in 2014.

In 2013, Benton took part in Strictly Come Dancing and in 2015, he hosted daytime game show The Edge.

Early life

Benton was born in Guisborough, North Riding of Yorkshire, England. He was in the same drama class at Stockton Billingham Technical College as Elizabeth Carling. Some of Benton's early acting experience came with Middlesbrough Youth Theatre, with performances in plays such as Atmos Fear and Twist.

Career

Benton has a recurring role as Father McBride in the James Nesbitt series Murphy's Law and has starred with Vic and Bob in the series Randall and Hopkirk (remake), Catterick, and Monkey Trousers. He also appeared as an Earthly representative of the Devil in the 2003 ITV drama The Second Coming, and the 2005 ITV drama Planespotting. From 1995 to 2003 Benton played Martin Pond in sitcom Barbara. He has also starred in the BBC Three comedy I'm with Stupid and in the Doctor Who episode "Rose" as conspiracy theorist Clive. In late 2008, Benton starred in the ITV drama Britannia High and co-stars in Scoop, in which he plays Max de Lacey. Benton co-starred in the Roman Mysteries episode "The Slave Girl from Jerusalem".

Film roles include Phil in the 2001 cult British independent film Mr In-Between, and the British comedy Three and Out released on 25 April 2008.Benton featured in all three of The Booze Cruise episodes with Martin Clunes and Brian Murphy among notable others.

In April 2008, Benton appeared as Jess Yates in the BBC Four drama Hughie Green, Most Sincerely.

Benton did the voiceover for the programme Street Doctor on BBC One.

Other roles have included Dad in The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus (2009), Hustle (2010), and Farmer Finch in the BBC's Land Girls.

Benton joined the cast of BBC drama Waterloo Road in its seventh series  as Daniel 'Chalky' Chalk, a Maths teacher until 6 March 2013 however, Benton returned for an episode in series 9.

In 2012, Benton appeared in the one-off special Panto! as Francis, the Director of the play.

In 2011, Benton appeared in The Railway Children at Waterloo Station in London as Mr Perks.

On BBC Radio 4, Benton starred as the optimistic title character Harvey Easter in Mr Blue Sky, written by Andrew Collins and broadcast in May and June 2011. A second series is due for May 2012. Benton has also played Fred the butcher in the televised series of episodes by Catherine Cookson.

In July 2012, it was announced that Benton would star as Edna Turnblad in the 2013 UK tour of Hairspray the Musical, starting in February 2013 and finishing in September 2013.

In 2015 Benton appeared as Police Constable Walt Everett in the BBC daytime series Father Brown, episode 3.12 "The Standing Stones". He also appeared as Les in the "La Couchette", the first episode of the second series of anthology series Inside No. 9.

In 2015, Mark presented the BBC One daytime game show The Edge for its first series, being replaced by Gabby Logan.

Strictly Come Dancing

In September 2013, Benton became one of the contestants in the eleventh series of the BBC One talent show Strictly Come Dancing, where he was partnered with world dancing champion Iveta Lukosiute. The couple left the show on week 10 after losing the public vote.

Personal life

Benton is a supporter of Middlesbrough F.C. and has featured in the club's official website advertising campaign to encourage other fans to renew their season tickets.


