
#Article: Mark Meily
#Type: regular article

Mark A. Meily (born August 18, 1967) is a multi-awarded film director in the Philippines. He currently teaches at the Marilou Diaz-Abaya Film Institute and Arts Center in Antipolo City, Philippines.

Early life

Meily was born in the city of Manila, Philippines. He studied at the University of the Philippines College of Fine Arts and at the Mowelfund Film Institute.

Personal life

Meily took up Visual Communications at the University of the Philippines before studying film at Mowelfund in Manila and in Paris at l”ESEC as a French Government Scholar for cinema. He wrote and directed Crying Ladies and La Visa Loca. These films were shown and have won awards in many international film festivals from Montreal to Kerala. Crying Ladies received the NETPAC Award and the Best Director prize at the International Film Festival of Kerala, India. It had a theatrical run in the US and was positively reviewed by the New York Times, the LA Times, and the Village Voice.

His third film Baler won 10 awards at the Metro Manila Film Festival and was exhibited at the MoMA in New York in 2009. His television sit-com Camera Café won the Best Comedy Program at the Asian TV Awards in Singapore.

His new film Donor won 5 awards at the 6th Cinemalaya Film Festival including Best Film in Manila. It also won the Grand Prize at the 30th Brussels Independent Film Festival . The film is in the official selection at the Pusan, Hawaii Goteborg, Seattle, Marrakesh International Film Festivals, and the Deauville Asian Film Festival.

He has taught film at the De La Salle University, the Marilou Diaz-Abaya Film Institute, and the Assumption College. He won the Palanca Literary Prize in 2001 and 2004.

In 2005, he co-founded Spark Digital Content, an interactive design studio and production company.

Television

In 2008, Meily directed the pilot week episode of Judy Ann Santos' "Habang May Buhay". He also wrote episodes and directed all six-seasons of the Asian adaptation of the hit French Sit-Com Camera Café. The series won Best Comedy Series at the Asian Television Awards in Singapore. He recently, finished the hit drama series"Jasmine" for TV5. For his television work, he won numerous awards such as the Catholic Mass Media Award, the Anvil Award, and the Philippine Advertising Creative Guild Prize. He is also the recipient of several awards from the Philippine Advertising Congress.

Writing

Meily has written two screenplays, Bayad Luha and The Good Friday Archipelago, which have won prizes from the Don Carlos Palanca Memorial Foundation annual literary contest.

Critical success

Meily directed Crying Ladies, his first feature film. The film won six (6) awards at the 2003 Metro Manila Film Festival including Best Picture and Best Director. The film also received several nominations from different award-giving bodies in Philippines.

Crying Ladies premiered in the United States and has received good reviews from the New York Times, Los Angeles Times, and The Village Voice. It has also been shown at the Montreal World Film Festival, Brussels Festival of Independent Cinema, Hamburg Film Festival, Newport Beach Film Festival, Dallas Asian Film Festival, Calcutta Film Festival, and Palm Springs Film Festival.

The film received the NETPAC Award for Best Asian Film and awarded for Meily the Best Director prize at the International Film Festival of Kerala, India. It is also the Philippine entry to the Best Foreign Language Film at the Academy Awards of the United States.

Meily also directed Pasyon U.S.A. (commercial title: La Visa Loca), a film largely based on his Palanca-prize winning screenplay Good Friday Archipelago.

In December 2008, his third feature, Baler topped the Metro Manila Film Festival garnering 11 awards and earning Meily his second Best Director trophy. Baler, a historical epic drama set during the end of the war of Independence in the Philippines, was screened later on at the Far East Film Festival in Udine and was the opening film of the Indio Bravo Film Festival at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. Meily also won another Best Director trophy at the PMPC Star Awards in 2009.

Mark Meily founded Spark Films, a pioneer in branded viral entertainment and together with CALT, France introduced the hit French sit-com Camera Cafe in Asia. The Asian adaptation of the series eventually won Best Comedy Program at the 2008 Asian Television Awards in Singapore.

Awards


