
#Article: Martin Ferris
#Type: regular article

Martin Ferris (born 10 February 1952) is an Irish Sinn Féin politician and a former Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) volunteer. He has been a Teachta Dála (TD) for the Kerry North-West Limerick (previously Kerry North) constituency since 2002.

Early and personal life

Ferris was born in Strand Street Tralee, County Kerry. His father was a farmer who was also a caretaker for Barrow House which was then owned by an aunt. He was educated locally at Barrow National School before going on to St Mary's CBS (The Green) and Tralee Technical School. He left school early working on his family's farm and as a fisherman. His father died from a stroke in 1970.

Martin met his wife, Máire (née Hoare), after his release from Portlaoise in 1977. They married in January 1978 and have six children. A daughter, Toiréasa, is a former Cathaoirleach (chairperson) and current member of Kerry County Council.

Gaelic football career

Ferris played in the Cotter Cup at the under-14 age group as a back. He played as centre forward for Churchill GAA. He began his inter-county career in 1972 playing Under-21 football for Kerry. He lined out as a forward beating Cork at the Munster final although the team was beaten by Galway at the All Ireland Final. Despite being on the run he was selected in 1973. He won an All-Ireland Under-21 Football Championship medal with Kerry beating Mayo 2-12 to 0-13. His career was interrupted by his imprisonment later that year. After being released he resumed playing for Churchill and was selected by Mick O'Dwyer to play for the Seniors in 1978. Ferris ceased to remain in the Kerry training panel after the Munster Final that year (which he was unable to play) due to poor health and Garda Special Branch surveillance.

IRA activity

Ferris joined the Provisional IRA shortly after the death of his father on 29 May 1970. aged 18, he was sworn in by Paddy Kelly and Liam Cotter, a former vice-chairman of the Kerry County Board of the GAA. The IRA in Kerry was under the direction of the IRA's Southern Command, whose main responsibility was to support IRA activity in Northern Ireland.

From September 1974 to February 1975, Ferris was on the run. He was suspected of having taken part in a robbery at the Tralee post office, which resulted in £74,000 being stolen and a robbery at the Chase Manhattan Bank in Shannon, County Clare in December 1974 which led to the theft of £159,000. He was arrested by Gardaí in Youghal, County Cork on 14 February 1975, along with two other IRA volunteers, Danny O'Sullivan and Robert McNamara. The Gardaí had been on the alert after a robbery at Central Dairies in Dungarvan, County Waterford. They were later tried by the Special Criminal Court, where O'Sullivan was sentenced to six and eight years concurrently. Ferris was not convicted of robbery but remanded to Portlaoise Prison pending further charges of membership in the IRA, a proscribed organisation. He was sentenced to 12 months in Portlaoise. He was released after nine months in November 1975.

He was arrested again in February 1976 at a roadblock in Ballinrobe, County Mayo after attending the funeral of Frank Stagg. On 16 February, he was charged with IRA membership at the Special Criminal Court and sentenced to 18 months in prison. In March 1977, Ferris took part in a hunger strike along with 20 other prisoners demanding a public inquiry into conditions in the prison. After 32 days, he was transferred to Curragh Military Hospital. The hunger strike ended after 47 days. A guarantee had been given to the prisoners by Bishop James Kavanagh that the government would work to improve prison conditions. Although conditions improved somewhat, Tim Pat Coogan, a nationalist historian and former editor of The Irish Press, noted that that after a visit in 1977 tensions still remained and mentioned reports of visitors being denied visits after long distances and that strip searching was still carried out. Ferris was released two months later in June 1977.

In September 1984, Ferris attempted to import seven tons of explosives, arms and ammunition, as well as medications, training manuals, and communications equipment, using the fishing vessel Marita Ann, which was skippered by Mike Browne, an IRA volunteer. The plan involved rendezvousing with the trawler Valhalla, captained by Bob Anderson, which sailed from Boston, transferring arms and ammunition to the Marita Ann and sailing to the south coast of Kerry where a number of cars were on standby to deliver the arms to various arms dumps. The Marita Ann was intercepted by the Irish Navy vessels the LÉ Emer and the LÉ Aisling on the south coast of Kerry with the arms and ammunition on board. The crew were arrested. On 11 December 1984, Ferris and two other members of the Marita Ann crew, including Browne and a United States citizen, John Crawley, were sentenced to ten years imprisonment at Portlaoise Prison. Gavin Mortimer and Johnny McCarthy both received suspended sentences. He was released on 11 September 1994.

In February 2005, the Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform Michael McDowell, using parliamentary privilege, named Ferris, as well as Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness, as members of the IRA Army Council, an allegation that has been denied by Ferris and the Sinn Féin leadership. In July of the same year, the Irish Independent reported that Ferris, along with Adams and McGuinness, had stepped down from the Army Council in the lead-up to an IRA statement on its future.

Ferris has courted controversy by his refusal to condemn the murder of Detective Garda Gerry McCabe during a botched Post Office raid by the provisional IRA in 1996. Ferris greeted Pearse McAuley and Kevin Walsh, the men charged with the manslaughter of Garda McCabe, upon their release from prison as part of the Good Friday Agreement.

Political Career

Kerry County Council

Following his release from prison he began focusing on community activism, particularly against drug dealing in Kerry. He was appointed to the Sinn Féin Árd Chomhairle in 1995. He ran for election to the Dáil at the 1997 general election in the Kerry North constituency polling 5,691 first preference votes but was not elected. At the 1999 local elections he was elected to Kerry County Council and Tralee town council, though he failed to be elected to the European Parliament in an election held on the same day.

Dáil Éireann

Ferris was first elected to Dáil Éireann at the 2002 general election for the Kerry North constituency, topping the poll and unseating former Tánaiste Dick Spring.

During the election campaign Ferris was arrested but later released. He later claimed that he had been verbally and physically assaulted while in Garda custody. His biographer J.J. Barrett described the Garda surveillance of Ferris as "unhealthy", writing that "it was to backfire seriously. He was re-elected at the 2007 and at the 2011 general election for the Kerry North-West Limerick constituency.

In the 31st Dáil he is the Sinn Féin spokesperson on Agriculture and Rural Development, and also on the Marine and Natural Resources.

Sources

	Barrett, J.J.; "Martin Ferris: Man of Kerry", ISBN 0-86322-310-9,


