
#Article: Michael Baumgartner
#Type: regular article

Michael James Baumgartner (born December 13, 1975) is a member of the Washington State Senate and a Republican. He was the 2012 Republican nominee for U.S Senate, running against Democratic incumbent Maria Cantwell. He lost the election, receiving 40% to Cantwell's 60%.

Early life, education, and career

Baumgartner was born in Pullman. His mother is a Kindergarten teacher and his father was a professor of Forestry and Natural Resource Sciences. After graduating from Pullman High School, he earned a scholarship to attend Washington State University. There, he was awarded a Thomas Foley scholarship, and was named a Stephenson scholar, an award given to the top graduates from the Honors College . He graduated in 1999 with a degree in Economics with minors in French and Mathematics. In 2002, he earned a Masters degree in Public Administration from Harvard University.

During the Iraq War, he served as the Economics Officer in the Office of Joint Strategic Planning & Assessment (JSPA) at the United States Embassy in Baghdad, helping the Iraqi government as part of the Baghdad Security Plan, receiving accolades from then General David Petraeus as well as Ambassador Ryan Crocker,. In 2008, he spent 7 months working as a civilian contractor in the Helmand Province of Afghanistan. That same year, the Boston Globe referred to Baumgartner as the "Architect of Hope" in the Middle East.

On September 10, 2012 Michael and his wife, Eleanor, gave birth to their second son, Roman.Michael and Eleanor got married after meeting in Afghanistan in 2010.

Washington State Senate

Baumgartner represents parts of the City of Spokane (map), Airway Heights, and Cheney including Eastern Washington University.

Elections

In late 2009, Baumgartner decided to run against Democrat State Senate Majority Whip Chris Marr for the Washington State Senate, 6th Legislative District seat. On August 17, 2010, in the state primary election, Baumgartner defeated Marr with 53% of the vote. In the November election, he officially defeated Marr with 54% of the vote. The election battle between Marr and Baumgartner is considered one of the most hotly contested and expensive state legislative races in Washington state history.

During his campaign for State Senate, Baumgartner said he would not support a womans right to terminate a pregnancy in cases of rape. In that same year, Baumgartner signed the Spokane County Republican Party Platform which called for the privatizing of Social Security the abolishment of the United States Department of Education, the withdrawal of the United States from the United Nations, withdrawal of the United States from the World Trade Organization, and the abolishment of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives.

Tenure

During his tenure as Washington State Senator, Baumgartner has sponsored keynote legislation such as an amendment to the Washington State Senate to rise Higher Education to the State's #2 focus, reorganizing and streamlining central service functions, powers, and duties of the State Government, and reforming the rule-making process for State Economic Policy (the latter two receiving 47-0 votes in the State Senate).

In 2012 Baumgartner was named one of the National Federation of Independent Business's Guardians of Business, the highest award they offer, in recognition of his votes that side "100 Percent" with small businesses. The Association of Washington Business has awarded him their 'Cornerstone Award' also, in recognition of his support for employers, economic development, and business-related issues in the Washington State Legislature.

Committee assignments

In 2011 and 2012, Baumgartner was the ranking minority member of the Economic Development Trade & Innovation Committee, served on the Ways & Means Committee, and the Higher Education & Workforce Development Committee.

In 2013, two Democrats joined with the 23 Republicans to form the Majority Coalition Caucus. With the new coalition, Baumgartner was named Vice-Chairman of the Senate Ways and Means Committee, and was also assigned to the Senate Trade and Economic Development Committee, the Higher Education Committee, and the Human Services and Corrections Committee.

2012 U.S. Senate election

In October 2011, Baumgartner decided to challenge incumbent U.S. Senator Maria Cantwell (D-WA). Cantwell was running for her third term. Washington uses a "top-two" nonpartisan blanket primary system, in which the top two candidates of any party in the primary election advance to the general election. Cantwell and Baumgartner finished first and second, respectively, and competed in the general election.

Baumgartner aroused controversy when a private e-mail he sent to a local left-wing blogger telling him to "go fuck yourself", was published on the public interest blog Publicola. Blogger Josh Feit and Baumgartner had a heated private discussion in which comments were made with which Baumgartner took exception. Baumgartner has since stated that the blogger "had it coming" and will not be apologizing for the remarks.

Baumgartner has formally endorsed Washington Initiative 502 to legalize, regulate and tax marijuana for adults 21 and over, making him the first and only candidate for statewide office in Washington state to do so, and taking a position that wasn't popular in his party.

In the November general election, Cantwell defeated Baumgartner. Cantwell received over 60% of the vote, to Baumgarter's 40%.


