
#Article: Michelle Kosinski
#Type: regular article

Michelle Kosinski-Duncan (born May 6, 1974) is an American journalist who is currently a White House correspondent for CNN. She was a foreign correspondent for NBC News based in London from 2010-2014, before that she was a correspondent based in Atlanta from 2005-2009.

Career overview

Kosinski has covered such world events as the War in Afghanistan, terrorist plots in Europe, international court cases, and the 2010 Haiti earthquake.

In 2009, she won a national Emmy award for live reporting during NBC News' special coverage of the 2008 U.S. presidential election.

Kosinski began work in broadcast journalism in Rockford, Illinois for WIFR while earning her BA and MA from the Medill School of Journalism at Northwestern University. Leaving WIFR, she moved to Charlotte, North Carolina at WSOC-TV and founded the Piedmont Bureau. In 2001, she was voted the Best Reporter in Charlotte by readers of the city's arts and entertainment magazine. In Fall of 2001, she left WSOC-TV for WTVJ in Miami. She is a 2003 Suncoast Regional Emmy Awards Craft Winner for reporting on Haitian immigrants and was named Woman of the Year in 2005 by Women in Communications of South Florida.

In 2005, Rolling Stone magazine named her "hot reporter" in its annual Hot List.

2010 saw Kosinski named foreign correspondent, moving from NBC's Southeast Bureau to London.

In 2014, she moved networks to CNN, as White House correspondent.

NBC News

Kosinski first joined NBC News in 2005 as a correspondent based in Miami, Florida, United States. In 2010 she became a foreign correspondent and moved London, United Kingdom. She was with NBC News for a total of nine years, five years in the United States and four years in London. During her tenure as London correspondent she reported from all over Europe and Eastern Asia. She appeared on all platforms of NBC News including, NBC Nightly News, Today, Early Today, MSNBC and Dateline NBC.

Other

In 2005, Kosinski made Rolling Stones Hot List, as "hot reporter."

In August 2005, while covering the Natalee Holloway disappearance in Aruba, NBC arranged an interview with the director of Aruban prisons and a tour of suspect Joran van der Sloots prison. During the tour, she ran into van der Sloot and conducted an off-camera interview. Prison director Fred Maduro appeared live on MSNBC and admitted that he offered her the tour. After Van der Sloots attorneys called for a hearing on the matter, NBC declined to air the footage.

In 2009, Kosinski purchased a $5.6 million, 12000 sq ft home in Coral Gables, Florida.

Personal life

Kosinski was born in Willingboro Township, New Jersey in the early 1970s  and grew up in Cinnaminson Township, New Jersey, a quiet suburb of Philadelphia. She is one of four children of Jeanette, a chemist, and Robert, a retired biologist who worked for the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.

Kosinski attended St. Charles Borromeo school, graduating with the top honors of her class, then was class valedictorian at Holy Cross High School. She was a cheerleader and trained in classical ballet, also exhibiting early proficiency in writing and the creative arts.

At Northwestern University, Kosinski was accepted to the Accelerated Master's Program in journalism, attaining a bachelor's and master's degree at graduation. Originally in the magazine writing program, she later switched to the broadcasting division.

While working as a television news photographer and reporter in Charlotte, North Carolina, Kosinski also performed with the award-winning Piedmont Players theater group, in roles such as Elvira in Blithe Spirit and Suzanne in Don't Dress for Dinner.

 she is living in London.

In August 2013 Michelle announced she was engaged to 48-year-old retired investment banker Kimbell Duncan. Duncan and Kosinski married on August 9, 2014.

Community

For several years, Kosinski has served on the executive host committee for Amigos for Kids, a charitable organization based in Miami. Kosinski has volunteered for and supported numerous community organizations. She has sought out and highlighted innovative charitable work around the United States, as a regular contributor to Nightly News' "Making a Difference" series, which has in turn positively impacted those efforts.


