
#Article: Michael Galvin
#Type: regular article

Michael Galvin is a New Zealand actor, singer and playwright, well known for his role as Dr. Chris Warner on the soap opera Shortland Street, a character he has played almost continuously since the show's debut in 1992, and remains the only original cast member.

Early life

As a student, Galvin attended and graduated both Victoria University and Toi Whakaari: New Zealand Drama School before performing in numerous plays.

Career

Shortland Street

In 1992 Galvin, a theatre actor at the time, auditioned for a role as Chris Warner in the upcoming Television New Zealand soap opera, Shortland Street alongside his flatmate Marton Csokas. Galvin won the role, with Csokas later going on to play Leonard Dodds. Galvin predicted the show would only last 12 months.Galvin portrayed Chris for four years, with the character picking up the nickname "Dr. Love" for the numerous love affairs he participated in. Galvin soon grew sick of portraying Chris, being quoted as saying "after four years on Shortland Street there was so much of me in Dr Warner I wasn't sure where he ended and I began." He quit and went travelling to seek further job opportunities.

Overseas and return to Shortland Street

During this time, he had roles in the television productions Highwater and Coverstory, and feature film The Climb, which starred John Hurt. Galvin was asked to return to Shortland Street in 2000 following a revamp of the show. He returned in the season final much to the delight on his fans. Since returning, Galvin has written many plays including the successful "Station to Station" and in 2007 Galvin was recognised as an outstanding emerging playwright, winning New Zealand's most significant national theatre award, the Bruce Mason Playwriting Award.

Personal life

Galvin is married to Melissa Galvin with whom he shares a daughter named Lily. The couple married in 2004, but separated 5 years later. He was introduced to Melissa through on screen girlfriend Angela Bloomfield (Rachel McKenna).

Filmography


