
#Article: Michelle Doherty
#Type: regular article

Michelle Doherty is an Irish actress, model, radio/television presenter and DJ. She has presented various television shows including Xposé, a daily entertainment/celebrity gossip TV show on TV3 in Ireland, Arthur's Day, RTÉ Two television series Under Ether, the weekday breakfast show, Pure Morning on Phantom FM now TXFM, and Night Shift and Day Shift on Channel 6 for a number of years before the closure of the station on 31 December 2008.

Career

Michelle is a model with Morgan The Agency, having got her career break whilst working in Dublin, Ireland as an air stewardess for the airline Aer Lingus, where she had worked since 1997. She was among twelve well-known females who took part in the "Max Factor Salutes Great Moments in Fashion" show for which she was styled in vintage fashions and hair styles, photographed by fashion photographer Sarah Doyle and wore a figure-hugging black dress by Louise Kennedy for a portrait which was then sold off at a charity auction. She presented Night Shift, the alternative music show on Channel Six, seven nights per week and also on two weekend afternoons. The decision not to renew the show left her feeling "completely bewildered, and absolutely gutted".

An online campaign to reinstate her on the new 3e roster was launched immediately. The programme is rumoured to be returning in 2014. Doherty's other careers have included a radio show, Finest Work Songs and Pure Morning on Phantom 105.2, co-hosting of the next-to-inaugural Choice Music Prize at Vicar Street, Dublin in February 2007 and being nominated for an IFTA. She also had a presenting role during the Arthur's Day events in Dublin in 2009. She has presented (When) Under Ether for RTÉ Two on Tuesday nights.

She presented Haiti Aid on February 3, 2010 at Whelan's and The Village in Dublin.

Michelle played the part of “Liv” in Lenny Abrahamson’s critically acclaimed, award winning film What Richard Did  and has just finished filming independent Irish film The Hit Producer where she played the lead role, Katelin Ballantine.

Personal life

Michelle is originally from County Donegal. She currently spends her time between Dublin and London. She currently resides in London where she will give birth to her first child in the coming months.

Awards and nominations

As well as being nominated for an IFTA, Michelle has also been nominated for Ireland's TV Personality of the Year award.

Michelle has won the Best Irish Radio DJ category in the Hot Press Annual Poll in 2009 and 2010 becoming the first ever female DJ to do so.


