
#Article: Mike Warnke
#Type: regular article

Michael Alfred "Mike" Warnke (born November 19, 1946) is an American Christian evangelist and comedian. With the success of his books and recordings, Warnke became one of evangelical Christianity's best-known experts on the subject of Satanism before his claims of having been a Satanist high priest were discredited in 1991 by the Christian magazine, Cornerstone.

Early life

Mike Warnke was born in 1946 to parents Alfred "Al" Warnke and Louise Warnke. When he was five years old, the Warnke family moved to Manchester, Tennessee where his father opened a truck stop. In 1955, Warnke's mother was killed in a car accident. In 1958 his father died, leaving Warnke an orphan. After the death of his father, Warnke was taken to live with two of his aunts in Sparta, Tennessee, and from there to his father's half-sister and her husband in San Bernardino, California. In June 1965, Warnke graduated from Rim of the World High School in Lake Arrowhead. That September, he enrolled at San Bernardino Valley College but withdrew after one semester, whereupon by his account, Warnke began his tenure as a Satanist. On June 2, 1966, Warnke enlisted in the United States Navy. After graduating from boot-camp on August 22, 1966, Warnke's assigned military occupational specialty was as a hospital corpsman.

According to the account of his life in the Satan Seller, Warnke converted to Christianity during navy boot camp. However, high-school acquaintance Charlotte Tweeten has stated she recalls him proclaiming faith in Christ in the year prior to his navy enlistment in 1966. Warnke also wrote that he began dating fellow Rim of the World High School alumna, Sue Studer, during this time period. This has been disproven, however, and Warnke was actually engaged to Lois Eckenrod at this time. In 1967, Warnke completed naval corpsman training, returned to San Diego, and married Studer. Together, they had two children.

In 1969, Warnke was deployed to Vietnam for a six-month tour of duty.  Having been wounded in battle during those six months, Warnke was awarded the Purple Heart. Warnke's own written accounts differ on the number of times he sustained injuries during his time in Vietnam. In The Satan Seller, Warnke says he was wounded twice, while in his second book, Hitchhiking on Hope Street, he states he was wounded five times. Despite these wounds received during his tour of duty as a hospital corpsman, second class, Warnke's various accounts have him spending much time detained, allegedly killing a man in battle, and surviving being shot several times, including once by an arrow. Warnke says it was the latter wound for which he was awarded the Purple Heart. Warnke returned to the United States in 1970.

While still serving in the navy, Warnke teamed up with San Diego evangelist Morris Cerullo and was touted for his "Satanist experience". Warnke and Cerullo toured the country participating in charismatic revival meetings. Cerullo wanted to write a book about youth occultism, and assigned the writing task to David Balsiger with help from Warnke. In early 1972, Warnke requested and received an early discharge from the navy as a conscientious objector so that he could work full-time in the ministry. Warnke then left Cerullo's ministry to start his own, forbidding Cerullo to use any of his material. It was at this time that Warnke and Balsiger went on to write the book that would make Warnke famous.

Rise to fame

The Satan Seller

In 1973, Warnke's book The Satan Seller was released. Written by Warnke, with help from Balsiger and Les Jones, the book tells of Warnke being orphaned as a child and his introduction into Satanism. Further detailed is Warnke's participation in sexual orgies, alcoholism, and drug dealing; his rise in the ranks of Satanism to the level of "high priest"; presiding over Satanic rituals including magical spells, summoning demons, ritual sex including a ritual kidnap and rape; the attempt on his life  -  a heroin overdose  -  that left him angry and disillusioned; his heroism in Vietnam; and how he found Jesus and came home as an evangelist. The story ends with Warnke living happily in California with wife Sue Studer. In fewer than three months after the release, The Satan Seller had become a religious best-seller.

The book launched Warnke into stardom within evangelical Christian communities. He became a popular speaker at Christian meeting places such as Melodyland in Anaheim, California. In 1974, Warnke moved his family to attend Trinity Bible College in Tulsa, Oklahoma, as a nine-month preparation for ministry. It was here, while among other charismatic Christians and recent converts preparing for a life of ministry, that Warnke met Carolyn Alberty and the two began a sexual affair. Warnke also met Elijah Coady, an independent, schismatic bishop of the Syro-Chaldean Church, also known as the Assyrian Church of the East or the Nestorian church. Coady ordained Warnke as a deacon. Upon graduation, Warnke was again ordained, and Warnke moved with his family to Denver, Colorado.

Recordings and wives

In November 1975 at an Indiana coffeehouse, Warnke's talk about his conversion from Satanism to Christianity was incidentally recorded. This recording became Warnke's first album, Alive, which was soon widely played on Christian radio. Later that same year, despite interventions from pastors and other acclaimed ministers, Warnke left his wife for Alberty and filed for divorce. The divorce was finalized in December 1975 and four months later, Warnke married Alberty.

Warnke's popularity earned him the cover of the September 1976 issue of the Christian magazine, Harmony. In 1977, Warnke released his second album, Jester In The King's Court. In 1978, Warnke recounted his Vietnam experiences on his third album, Hey, Doc!. His albums became "the most popular Christian comedy albums ever produced". During a tour to Hazard, Kentucky, Warnke met Rose Hall, a thrice-divorced mother of three children. At this time, Warnke began courting Hall while still married to his second wife. Warnke's second marriage came to an end when, as Alberty stated in an interview, "Warnke threw me into a wall and split my head open. He said, 'If you go to a local hospital and tell them what your name is, I'll kill you.'" Alberty fled to Florida. By November 1979, their divorce was final, and Warnke moved to Hall's farm in Kentucky. On January 2, 1980, Warnke and Hall were married.

During the 1980s, Warnke's ministry prospered, as Warnke and his new wife toured and performed together, raising millions of dollars for their ministry. Contributions to the ministry were over $1 million in 1985, and over $2 million each year from 1987 through 1990. As the Warnkes' popularity waxed, their personal relationship waned. In 1984, Warnke's wife wrote, "Satan provided a woman to fill the gap in Michael's life." The Warnkes separated in 1989 and later divorced in 1991. Six weeks after the divorce was finalized, Warnke married Rim of the World High School alumna Susan Patton.

Extravagant claims

In 1982, Warnke began to exaggerate his achievements. During the 1980s, Warnke's claims of academic degrees increased from two Bachelor's degrees to two Master's Degrees to a Doctorate of Philosophy. In The Satan Seller, Warnke says he was wounded twice while in Vietnam. In Hitchhiking on Hope Street, he said he had been wounded five times. Warnke followed up his interest in the Syro-Chaldean tradition and his 1970s ordination as a deacon with a 1983 ordination by independent bishop Richard Morrill, lately of the Byzantine Catholic Church, Inc. This ordination allowed Warnke to call himself bishop.

National exposure

On May 16, 1985, Warnke appeared in a prime-time news report about Satanism on ABC's 20/20. In the show's episode titled "The Devil Worshippers", Warnke was included in a number of segments where he discussed the implements and clothing used in Satanic ceremonies, a scar allegedly indicating where he was repeatedly cut so that his blood could be used in Satanic ceremonies, and what drew him to Satanism. After Warnke's appearance on 20/20, he was frequently cited as an expert on the occult by Christian radio host Bob Larson and the Chick Publications stable of authors.

Investigation and debunking

In 1991, Cornerstone magazine launched an investigation into Warnkes life and testimony. The previous year, Cornerstone had debunked Lauren Stratfords story that had been recounted in Satans Underground. Stratford claimed her deep involvement in Satanism led her to partake in a ritual in which her own child was sacrificed. After the exposé showed Stratfords alleged child had never existed, Cornerstone journalists Mike Hertenstein and Jon Trott investigated Warnke and his life.

The Cornerstone investigation spanned from interviews with over 100 of Warnkes personal friends and acquaintances to his ministrys tax receipts. The investigation revealed a number of inaccuracies and evidence of fraud and deceit in Warnkes accounts. During the course of Cornerstones investigation, pictures of Warnke taken during the time he was alleged to be a Satanist priest were discovered. Rather than showing an emaciated drug-addict sporting long fingernails and waist-length hair, the pictures showed Warnke as a typical square of the mid-1960s. The investigation also revealed Warnkes claims that he and Charles Manson had attended a Satanic ritual to be false; Manson was in federal prison at the time, having no known ties to Satanic churches.

The investigation further uncovered that before joining the Navy, Warnke had been involved with the college Christian ministry Campus Crusade for Christ. The investigation also revealed the unflattering circumstances surrounding Warnkes multiple marriages, affairs, and divorces. Most critically, however, the investigation showed how Warnke could not have done the many things he claimed to have taken part in throughout the nine months he claimed to be a Satanist - including his claims to be a drug-addicted dealer or a Satanic high priest.

Before publishing the article, Cornerstone contacted Warnke for an interview, but he and Cornerstone could not agree to the terms of an interview. In June 1992, at the annual Christian Booksellers Association convention, Cornerstone revealed its story.

Aftermath

Warnke sent a response to Cornerstone, published in July, insisting he told the truth, stating: Despite these assertions, Warnke did not provide the name of a single Satanist but used invectives against ex-wife Carolyn. In the ensuing months, Warnke conceded parts of the allegations, telling Christianity Today that there had been only 13 members of his coven, not 1,500 as originally claimed, and that of those 13, the whereabouts of five were unknown to him, while the other eight had since died.

Public response was varied but was nevertheless overwhelmingly against Warnke. Initially, Word Records stated that they would stand by their artist. However, further investigations by local Kentucky reporters at the Lexington Herald-Leader revealed that Warnke's ministry had engaged in financial misdeeds and that "Mike, his ex-wife Rose, and her brother Neale Hall received a total of $809,680 in salary at a time when the ministry newsletter claimed donations were down and more funds were needed." One week later, Word Records dropped Warnke from its label. Finally, on September 30, 1992, fewer than 100 days after the investigation was made public, Warnke Ministries closed its doors.

In the spring of 1993, Warnke submitted to the authority of an assembly of ministers "acting as elders", acknowledging his "ungodliness", his "multiple divorces", his "failure as husband, father, and friend", and of "embellishment and exaggeration ... in an attempt ... to entertain", and offering to pay back taxes to the federal government. The group recommended specific changes to the ministry, including a salary cap and accountability reports. Nonetheless, he continued to "stand by his testimony of former Satanic involvement" stating in a 2000 interview with the Daily Oklahoman, "Exaggeration did creep into some of my stories, but my testimony is still my testimony." As of 2006, a letter posted on Warnke's web site indicated the group had released him as having met their accountability requirements.

In 1997, Warnke suffered a heart attack. In 2000, he began attempting a comeback, limited to small churches in Kentucky. In 2002, he published Friendly Fire: A Recovery Guide for Believers Battered by Religion (ISBN 0-7684-2124-1), an account of what he perceived as his unfair treatment by fellow Christians in the wake of the Cornerstone exposé.  By 2004, he was making occasional performing appearances at churches around the country, often referred to simply as "Christian comedian Mike Warnke", and sometimes as a former Satanic priest although some mentions in the news referred to the Cornerstone exposé.

See also

	 Tony Anthony - a British evangelist whose claims were exposed as false

	 Lauren Stratford - an American whose claims to have been brought up as a baby breeder in a satanic cult were exposed as false

	 John Todd - an American who claimed to have been a Satanic high priest before his conversion to Christianity

	 Michelle Remembers - a discredited memoir detailing Satanic ritual abuse by Canadian psychiatrist Lawrence Pazder and his patient and later wife, Michelle Smith


