
#Article: Mohammad-Reza Bateni
#Type: regular article

Mohammad Reza Bateni (ﻤﺤﻤﺪﺭﻀﺎ ﺒﺎﻄﻨﻰ) is a prominent Iranian linguist and scholar. He was born in 1934 in Isfahan, Iran. He obtained his bachelor’s degree in English language and literature from Daneshsara-ye Aali (Institute of Higher Education) in Tehran. He graduated in linguistics from the University of Leeds and the University College at the Master’s and doctoral levels. Bateni has also formerly worked at the MIT and the University of California, Berkeley, as a researcher and professor. He is currently retired from Tehran University.

Bateni has published numerous books and journal papers. Some of his works include "A New Glance at Grammar", "A Description of Persian Language Structure" and "A Prologue to Philosophy". "A Description of Persian Language Structure" (republished 20 times) is an analytical study of the structure of 11,000 Persian sentences culled from magazines, newspapers and different writings.

Perhaps Bateni's most significant contribution is his English to Persian Dictionary published by Farhang Moaser. The first edition of the dictionary received the Book of the Year Award in 1994. It included about 40,000 entries of contemporary English words. The second edition of this dictionary included approximately 50,000 entries. The third edition, entitled Farhang Moaser POOYA English-Persian Dictionary embraces about 60,000 entries in addition to numerous subentries and examples. This edition, published in 2006, is the result of over 20 years of research by Dr. Bateni and his associates at the Research Unit of Farhang Moaser Institute.

Among his recent presentations at international conferences are:

	 "Assessing the State of Contemporary Persian", a Plenary Lecture at Seventh Biennial Conference on Iranian Studies, July 31- August 3, 2008, Toronto http://www.iranian-studies.com/.

	 "Collocations and Idioms and their Translatability" at Seventh Biennial Conference on Iranian Studies, July 31- August 3, 2008, Toronto http://www.iranian-studies.com/.

	 "Recent Advances in Persian Lexicography" at the First International Conference on Aspects of Iranian Linguistics, 17-19 June 2005 Leipzig, Germany http://lingweb.eva.mpg.de/IranianConference2005/programme.html.

	 "A Glance at Sociology of Language ( Sociolinguistics )", July 2007, University of Toronto.

	 "Language Relativity", August 2008, University of Toronto.

	 "On the Attempts to Teach Language to Chimpanzees: Success or Failure?", November 2009, University of Toronto.

Persian Links

	 A New Approach to Persian Language

	 A report on BBC Persian

	 List of publications


