
#Article: Srgjan Kerim
#Type: regular article

Srgjan Asanov Kerim (Срѓан Aсанов Керим) (Sercan Hasan'ın oğlu Kerim) (born December 12, 1948 in Skopje) is Macedonian diplomat, economist, and former president of the United Nations General Assembly. His term of office began on September 18, 2007 and ended on September 16, 2008. He is ethnically half Macedonian half Turkish.

Education

In 1971, Kerim graduated from the University of Belgrade Faculty of Economics and in 1982 he was granted a Ph.D. in economic science.

Career

Early career

1972-1991Assistant and professor at the International Economic Relations Desk at the Faculty of Economics in Belgrade; Visiting professor at the University of Hamburg, Germany and at the University in New York.

In 2003, Kerin was General Manager of Media Print (Republic of Macedonia) and General Manager for South-Eastern Europe of the WAZ Media Group.

Political and diplomatic career

He was Foreign Minister of the Republic of Macedonia in 2000 and 2001. From 2001 to 2003, he played the role of a Permanent Representative of the Republic of Macedonia to the United Nations in New York City. During his diplomatic career, from 1994 to 2000 he was Ambassador to the Federal Republic of Germany, and from 1995 to 2000 he was appointed Ambassador to Switzerland and Liechtenstein. In 2000, he was Special Envoy of the Coordinator of the Stability Pact for Southeast Europe.

The offices he held during his political career in the former SFR Yugoslavia include: Minister of Foreign Economic Relations in the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, Assistant Minister and Spokesperson in the Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs of SFR Yugoslavia.

President of the United Nations General Assembly

Kerim was elected the 62nd President of the Assembly. He said in his opening speech of the 62nd session on 25 September 2007:climate change, financing for development and achieving the Millennium Development Goals, countering terrorism, and reforms aimed at improving the management, effectiveness and coherence of the world body are among the top priorities during the session

Academic career

Kerin is an author of 9 books in the field of international politics, international economy and youth issues, as well as of more than 100 scientific works published in several countries.

Upon assuming the office of Ambassador of the Republic of Macedonia, he has delivered more than 60 lectures in the country of accreditation and in Austria, on Balkan issues in the context of international politics and economy.

Some of his works have been published in magazines and books such as:

	"Economic Development of Macedonia since 1991" - published in "Österreichische Osthefte" of the Austrian Institute for Eastern and South-Eastern Europe in Vienna.

	 "Strategies for Integration of the Republic of Macedonia in EU and NATO"- publication project of the Defense University in Munich -Institute for International Politics and Human Rights (Lang or Nomos Publishing Ltd.)


