
#Article: Mónica Farro
#Type: regular article

Mónica Patricia Farro Dávila (born February 28, 1976 in Montevideo) is a Uruguayan supervedette, model and actress of theatre and television who started her career as a child commercial model and then as an erotic actress and fetish model for Playboy TV, who was chosen as Miss Uruguay for Playboy's 2004, Miss Playboy. Farro is also known for her work and is many times compared with fellow supervedettes, Adabel Guerrero and Valeria Archimó.

Theatre

Farros launch to fame was on 2007 after being discovered by the Argentine theater producer, Gerardo Sofovich in the Uruguayan capital, Montevideo. He then signed Farro to his theater company for two years in which she performed in one of his comedies, "No somos santas", one of his musical comedies "Le Referi Cornud", and in 2008 she was cast by Sofovich to co-star the magazine, "La Fiesta Está En El Lago" alongside dancer Valeria Archimó and actress-dancer Adabel Guerrero, all three writing, produced and directed by Sofovich and also directed by René Bertrand. Later on in 2009 Farro was signed into Carmen Barbieris theater company and protagonist two of her magazines, "Fantástica" in the 2009-10 theatrical season and "Bravísima" in the 2010-11 season, both as the First Vedette. Mónica then decided not sign for another year in the company because she wasnt pleased with some of her cast members, especially Uruguayan actress-dancer and fashion model, Andrea Ghidone and Greek-Argentine amateur glamour model and media-showbiz personality, Victoria Xipolitakis. Barbieri has commented that she will have her back for the 2013-14 summer season at all cost. After four years of doing classical revue musicals, Farro was called in 2011 to lead and debut as a supervedette and as her own producer in an alternative revue show mixed with musical comedy with Negro Álvarez touring all Argentina and parts of Uruguay. On November 2, 2012 the actress made an appearance for the river border state of Argentina to Uruguay, Entre Ríos Province in the Astros theater where she and many other theater artist presented Entre Ríos summer theatrical season debut for 2012 and 2013 with three shows, one in which she will star as the lead actress in a theater comedy, "La noche de las pistolas frías". In November Farro led a mini theater magazine show, "Empetroladas" alongside dancing partner, Cristian Ponce in Cutral Có, Neuquén. On January 4, 2013 "La noche de las pistolas frías" debuted in El Gran Teatro Colón, in Entre Ríos with Farro alongside Emilio Disi, Martín "Campi" Campilongo, Claudia Ciardone, Florencia "Flopy" Tesouro, Manuel Navarrete, Cristina Alberó and Luly Drozdek.

Bailando 2008 & El Musical de tus Sueños

Farro has participated in the fifth season of Bailando por un Sueño with professional dancer Nicolás Scillama, where she reached the top eight. She was bested by Guerrero who reached the top six and Archimó who reached the semi-finals (third place tide with María Fernanda Callejón).

Mónica had a special participation in "El Musical de tus Sueños" in 2009 dancing on doble stripper poles alongside Valeria Archimó opening up for the special edition re-entry gala (in which Guerrero entered).

Bailando 2011

Farro has participated in the seventh season of Bailando por un Sueño with professional dancer Christian Ponce.

Personal life

Farro was married to Urugayan footballer, Enrique Ferraro with whom she had a child named Diego Ferraro Farro in Uruguay.

See also

	 List of Playboy models

	 List of glamour models

Sources

	 

	 

	 

	 

	 

	 


