
#Article: Natalie Tennant
#Type: regular article

Natalie E. Tennant (born December 25, 1967) is the Secretary of State of West Virginia. She was elected in 2008 and officially took office on January 19, 2009. She is a member of the Democratic Party. Tennant was the 2014 Democratic Party nominee for West Virginia's open U.S. Senate seat, she lost to Republican Shelley Moore Capito.

Prior to her election as Secretary of State, Tennant was a television reporter and co-owner of a video production company.

Early life and education

Tennant grew up on a farm in Fairview, Marion County, West Virginia and is the daughter of Rose Mary (née Brunetti) and John D. Tennant, Jr. Her mother was of Italian descent. Tennant is a 1986 graduate of North Marion High School in Farmington, West Virginia.

She graduated from West Virginia University in 1991 with a bachelor’s degree in journalism, and she obtained a master’s degree in corporate and organizational communication from WVU in 2002. While at WVU, Tennant was selected in 1990 as the first woman to represent the university as the Mountaineers' mascot. Following completion of her undergraduate degree in 1991, Tennant began her career in television broadcasting and reporting.

West Virginia Secretary of State

Elections

In 2004, Tennant ran unsuccessfully for West Virginia Secretary of State, losing the Democratic primary to Ken Hechler by 1,108 votes.

In 2008, Tennant was elected secretary of state, beating out Republican candidate Charles Minimah with 65% of the vote.

Tenure

Tennant took office as the Secretary of State of West Virginia on January 19, 2009.

In 2010, Tennant initiated a pilot online voting program that allowed 179 deployed West Virginian service members to vote via the Internet.

In 2012, the Secretary of State’s office issued a Republican primary ballot, which told voters to select 18 at-large delegates to the Republican National Convention when 19 were to be chosen. The error cost West Virginia $148,705 to reprint the ballots and another $64,000 to reprogram the digital voting machines.

In 2013, the Secretary of State’s office was late sending out change-of-address materials to election officials, which are sent out every two years to keep election rolls accurate. According to the Harrison County Clerk's office, the materials should have arrived at the end of 2013 to give officials time to send them out before the primary election in May 2014, but some county clerks did not receive the materials until April 2014 or later.

In 2012, Tennant, along with U.S. Attorney Booth Goodwin, led the investigation of Lincoln County Democratic officials who tried to flood the 2010 Democratic primary with fraudulent absentee ballots. In light of the investigation, two Democratic officials were charged with election fraud. In 2012 Tennant tried and failed to gag Thomas Harding the publisher of the West Virginia Observer newspaper, the case was known as Harding v Tennant.

In 2013, Tennant returned $3 million in unused revenue to the state legislature after Tennant's department enacted cost-saving measures and settled two lawsuits for significantly less money than expected.

In 2014, a number of West Virginian political candidates were unable to file their campaign finance reports on the Secretary of State’s website due to issues with the online campaign finance reporting system. Tennant said "The company that was hired to update the campaign finance reporting system has not met the standards of my office, has not met the standards of the contract or what West Virginians deserve...They are being held accountable."

Funding

Tennant has received campaign funding from the Secretary of State Project, a 527 political action committee that supports progressive candidates for secretary of state positions in swing states.

Gubernatorial campaign

On January 20, 2011, Tennant announced she was running for the Democratic nomination for Governor of West Virginia in the 2011 special gubernatorial election. Tennant focused her campaign on openness and accountability, which she said had been a hallmark of her tenure as Secretary of State.

Public polling conducted in January 2011 showed Tennant to be a front runner in the Democratic primary, alongside acting governor Earl Ray Tomblin. She lost the primary election to acting governor Earl Ray Tomblin, coming in third place behind state house speaker Rick Thompson.

U.S. Senate campaign

Tennant ran for the Senate in 2014. The seat was open after incumbent Democrat Jay Rockefeller announced his retirement. Tennant lost to Republican Representative Shelley Moore Capito in the general election, losing every county in the state. The 34.5 percent won by Tennant was the lowest ever by a Democratic nominee across the 38 U.S. Senate races in West Virginia history.

Tenant did not face any significant primary opposition. She entered the race after ten prominent Democrats declined to run. In announcing her campaign, Tennant stated, "I will fight any Republican or any Democrat — including President Barack Obama — who tries to kill our energy jobs, whether they are coal, natural gas, wind or water.” Tennant was endorsed by Senator Rockefeller, Senator Joe Manchin, and Governor Earl Ray Tomblin. She was also endorsed by First Lady Michelle Obama, North Dakota Senator Heidi Heitkamp, and Massachusetts Senator Elizabeth Warren, who hosted a fundraiser for Tennant.

According to Politico and the New York Times, Tennant sought to distance herself from President Obama. Tennant was an Obama delegate at the 2012 Democratic National Convention.

Personal life

Prior to Tennant's election as Secretary of State, she was co-owner of Wells Media Group, a Charleston-based video production and media training company she operated with her husband, Democratic State Senator Erik Wells. Tennant and Wells have one daughter, Delaney, and reside in Charleston.


