
#Article: Ana María Orozco
#Type: regular article

Ana María Orozco Aristizábal (born 4 July 1973) is a Colombian movie, theatre and television actress who achieved wide fame after her portrayal as Betty in the telenovela Yo soy Betty, la fea. In 2001, Orozco won the award for International Female Personality of the Year (Figura internacional femenina del año) at the New York Latin ACE Awards and in 2002, won the award for Actress of the Year (Actriz del año) at the INTE Award for her performance in the telenovela Yo soy Betty, la fea (1999).

Private life

Born in Bogotá, Colombia. Orozco is the daughter of actor Luis Fernando Orozco and radio announcer Carmenza Aristizábal. She is also the older sister of actress Verónica Orozco (b. 1979) and Juliana. In April 1999, Orozco married actor Julian Arango, but the marriage lasted only 10 months. Since 2004, she has lived in Bogotá, Colombia. From 2005 to 2012, she was married to Argentine musician Martín Quaglia. Quaglia and Orozco have two daughters, Lucrecia (b. 11 June 2004 in Bogotá, Colombia) and Mia (b. February, 2010 in Buenos Aires, Argentina).

Career

Ana María Orozco made her television debut as a child alongside her father, Luis Fernando Orozco in La envidia (1973), but her career began in earnest a decade later with the series Pequeños Gigantes (1983). One of her most memorable performances was as a secretary (Verônica Murillo) in Perro Amor (1998). She is best known to fans around the world as the original Betty from the popular Colombian telenovela Yo soy Betty, la fea (I am Betty, the ugly one) and its spinoff Eco moda. Her role on Betty La Fea and the character's unattractive/ugly duckling trademark has inspired several international versions, including the Mexican serial La fea más bella and the critically acclaimed American smash hit Ugly Betty. The original version itself become one of the world's most popular television shows of all time.

Filmography

Television

Telenovelas

Series / Miniseries

Movies

Theater

Awards and nominations


