
#Article: Kyle Gallner
#Type: regular article

Kyle Steven Gallner (born October 22, 1986) is an American actor. He is possibly best known for his portrayal of Cassidy "Beaver" Casablancas in the television series Veronica Mars, and for guest-starring in drama series Smallville as superhero Bart Allen. He is also well known for portraying Reed Garrett, Mac Taylor's stepson, on CSI: NY, and for his roles in the horror films The Haunting in Connecticut, Jennifer's Body and the remake of A Nightmare on Elm Street.

Early life and career

Gallner was born in West Chester, Pennsylvania, to Larry and Mary Jane Gallner. He has an older sister, Samantha, and two younger siblings, Eva and Jack. Kyle attended West Chester East High School. He started his career by following his sister along to one of her auditions. He proceeded to guest star on popular shows such as Judging Amy and Close to Home. Gallner joined the cast of Veronica Mars as Cassidy Casablancas toward the end of the show's first season, in May 2005 before becoming a season regular during the show's second season.

After playing Bart Allen in the Smallville episode "Run", Gallner reprised the role on the January 18, 2007 episode "Justice" and the season 8 finale. He also guest starred on Cold Case as a teenage gunman in the episode "Rampage", and appeared in the independent film Sublime. In 2007, he guest starred in an episode of Law & Order: Special Victims Unit titled "Impulsive" as a high school student who accuses his teacher (played by Melissa Joan Hart) of statutory rape.

He also guest starred in an episode of Bones as Jeremy Farrell, the suspected murderer of a child beauty pageant contestant. He also played the lead role in the horror film The Haunting in Connecticut, playing a cancer patient who is tormented by evil spirits.

He appeared in the independent film Cherry, filmed on the campuses of Kalamazoo College and Western Michigan University, along with several locations in downtown Kalamazoo, Michigan. He plays Aaron, an Ivy League freshman who falls for an older woman while becoming the object of affection for the woman's young daughter.

Gallner played Quentin in the reboot of A Nightmare on Elm Street; his character is the love interest of main character Nancy.

Gallner played the brother of Aaron Paul's character in the 2012 film, Smashed.

Gallner played Zach in one episode in the fourth season of AMC's The Walking Dead. It was initially reported that he would be a recurring character, but his character was killed off instead.

In 2014 Gallner played the role of Kurt, the antagonist to lead character Sam, in the independent film Dear White People.

Personal life

Gallner is good friends with actor Jake Abel, his former roommate. The two had a band called "The Third Kind" together for a short time. He attended Abel's wedding to Allie Wood in late 2013. In 2013, he also co-founded the independent production company Minutehand Pictures along with Oliver Thompson and Bay Dariz. The trio is currently producing the feature film Welcome to Happiness, in which Gallner portrays Woody Ward, a children's book author with a secret door in his closet.

Gallner is in a relationship with Tara Ferguson, with whom he has two sons: Oliver Michael Gallner (born March 21, 2013), and Leo Grey Gallner (born November 9, 2014).

Gallner's father is of Jewish descent.

Filmography


