
#Article: Kim Bodnia
#Type: regular article

Kim Bodnia (born 12 April 1965) is a Danish actor, and occasional writer and director. He is best known internationally for his role as "Martin Rohde" in the Scandinavian crime drama television series The Bridge. He also played "Frank" in Pusher and "Jakov" in episode 4 of Those Who Kill.

Early life

Bodnia was born in Copenhagen, but grew up in Espergærde, Denmark. His family is Jewish (originally from Poland and Russia), but when asked about his religious beliefs he said that he has: None, other than that I believe in nature.

Bodnia admitted that as a child he was not a particularly good student, describing himself as a "clown", and reluctant to study. His main interest was in athletics, particularly the 100 metres and the long jump, in which he was the Zealand youth champion for several years. Bodnia aspired to become a goalkeeper, but a foot injury prevented him from pursuing a career in professional football.

As a student at Espergærde Ungdomsskole Bodnia joined the theatre group, performing mainly in comic roles. When he was 16 his mother suggested he apply for a place at National Theatre School in Copenhagen. His first application failed, but he gained entry on his second attempt a year later in 1987.

One of his first leading roles after graduation in 1991 was as Patrick Bateman in a stage version of American Psycho, and he was subsequently often typecast as violent, brutal characters. In his film debut En Afgrund af frihed ("An Abyss of Freedom") (1989) he played a small supporting role as a bouncer.

Film career

Bodnia's first leading role in a film was in Bulldozer (1993), directed by Maria Sødahl, but his breakout role came a year later in Ole Bornedal's horror film Nightwatch (1994). Despite this success it was two years before he appeared in another film, Nicolas Winding Refn's Pusher (1996), and three years later he appeared in Winding Refn's Bleeder. He has since appeared in Terribly Happy (2008), and in three Lasse Spang Olsen films: In China They Eat Dogs (1999) and its sequel Old Men in New Cars (2002), and in Den Gode Strømer ("The Good Cop") (2004), which he co-wrote with the director. Bodnia has also appeared in several Norwegian films, including Himmelfall (2002), Monstertorsdag (2004), and Tomme Tønner (2010). He also appeared in the 2011 English-language Indian comedy Delhi Belly playing a Russian smuggler. 

In 2014 he appeared as the eponymous interrogator Rosewater, directed by Jon Stewart.

On television

Though primarily a film actor, Bodnia has also appeared regularly on television, making his first appearance in the historical mini-series Snapphanar in 2006. He subsequently appeared in three episodes of the first season of crime series Forbrydelsen ("The Killing") (2007), and in two episodes of the comedy drama Hvor fanden er Herning? ("Where the hell is Herning?") (2009), before returning to crime series, appearing in episodes of the Swedish Kommissarie Winter (2010), Den som dræber ("Those Who Kill") (2011), and the German/Swedish Der Kommissar und das Meer ("The Inspector and the Sea") (2012).

In 2011 Bodnia played Danish detective "Martin Rohde" in the first series of the Danish/Swedish series Broen|Bron ("The Bridge"), returning for a second series in 2013. Bodnia signed for a third series, but later dropped out, reportedly unhappy with the development of his character.

As director

In 2001 he co-wrote and directed the short film Escape - Flugten fra ensomheden ("Escape - Flight from loneliness"). In early 2014 he directed readings of The Tailor's Tale, a play based on his family's experience of life in Copenhagen under Nazi occupation, written by his cousin Alexander Bodin Saphir, and performed at the Scandinavia House-The Nordic Center in America in New York.

Personal life

Bodnia has been married twice, first to actress Lotte Andersen, with whom he has a son Louis, and currently to actress Rikke Louise Andersson, with whom he has three children, two boys, Charlie and Miles and a daughter, Nomi.

Filmography


