
#Article: Robert Fuller
#Type: regular article

Robert Welch (born May 14, 1947) is a professional wrestler and manager better known by his ring names Robert Fuller and Col. Robert Parker. Robert and his brother Ron co-owned Continental Championship Wrestling for a time.

Career

Fuller started wrestling in 1970 in the Alabama and Tennessee regions. He often teamed with his cousin Jimmy Golden and they won many tag team titles.

In the 1980s, he took his brother Ron's idea and made a stable called The Stud Stable. Among the members in the independent versions of this stable were Golden, Sid Vicious, Cactus Jack, Dutch Mantel, Gary Young, and Brian Lee.

He spent some time in the American Wrestling Association with Golden in 1988, and they feuded with The Rock 'n' Roll Express (Ricky Morton and Robert Gibson). He also wrestled in the Texas area where he teamed with Jeff Jarrett.

In 1993, Fuller went to World Championship Wrestling as manager Col. Robert Parker, a takeoff of Col. Tom Parker of Elvis Presley fame. He managed Sid Vicious and teamed with manager Harley Race and his protege, Vader to form "The Masters of the Powerbomb". They feuded with Sting and Davey Boy Smith. In 1994, he managed "Stunning Steve" Austin before reforming his "Stud Stable" with Golden as "Bunkhouse Buck", Meng, Dick Slater, Terry Funk and Arn Anderson. They feuded heavily with Dusty and Dustin Rhodes. In 1995, Col. Parker courted Sherri Martel to the dismay of both the Stud Stable and Sherri's charges, Harlem Heat. Parker and Sherri went to get married and Sherri was attacked by Madusa, who was supposed to be Parker's wife. Parker and Sherri split and feuded and then made up again, with Parker leaving the Stud Stable to help Sherri manage Harlem Heat. While with Harlem Heat, Parker's official title was "promoter," while Sherri retained the "manager" designation. One trademark of Parker's managing would be his fanning himself during matches. In October 1996, Harlem Heat fired Parker after he helped to cost them the WCW World Tag Team Championships. He quickly started to manage The Amazing French Canadians (Jacques Rougeau and Carl Ouellet), trading in his gray suit for a French Foreign Legion uniform. Harlem Heat and The Amazing French-Canadians immediately began feuding.

Fuller was released from WCW in 1998 and in March 1998, he resurfaced in the WWF as Tennessee Lee, a character similar to his Col. Parker character, and began managing Jeff Jarrett. His time in the WWF was short-lived; he would be released in May 1998 and went back to wrestling with Golden on the independent circuit in Alabama.

On June 2, 2006 in Irondale, Alabama, Fuller managed Shannon Spruill against El Mexico for the NWA Wrestle Birmingham Junior Heavyweight Championship. With the help of Fuller (who referred to Spruill as his "Million Dollar Baby"), Spruill defeated El Mexico to win her third wrestling title.

On September 14, 2006, Fuller was seen, once again as Col. Parker, being interviewed by Robert Roode on TNA iMPACT!.

Personal life

Robert Fuller comes from a wrestling family: his father Buddy Fuller and his grandfather Roy Welch were wrestlers, as were his brother Ron Fuller and his cousin Jimmy Golden.

He has been married four times. Joyce Logan, who he has his oldest daughter Kimberly by, Sylvia Wilson (Miss Sylvia), who he has Katie and Charlotte by, Susan Lostraglio, who he had no children with, and his current wife Laverne Stewart.He has 7 grandchildren (Sydney, Shanna,Cameron, Killian, Gabe, and a baby due in early 2015). Fuller currently resides in Seminole, Florida.

In wrestling

	With Jimmy Golden

	Spike piledriver

	Managers

	Ron Fuller

	Jonathan Boyd

	Downtown Bruno

	Eddie Gilbert

	Ronald Gossett

	Ron Slinker

	Miss Sylvia

	Wrestlers managed

	The Stud Stable (Arn Anderson, Bunkhouse Buck, Blacktop Bully, Terry Funk, Dick Slater, Meng, Kurasawa, "Stunning" Steve Austin, Barry Windham)

	Sid Vicious

	Vader, with Harley Race

	Harlem Heat (Booker T and Stevie Ray), with Sister Sherri

	The Super Assassins (Super Assassin 1 and Super Assassin 2)

	The Amazing French Canadians (Jacques Rougeau and Carl Ouellet)

	Jeff Jarrett

	Daffney

	Elix Skipper and David Young, with Daffney

	Sonny Siaki

	McNasty

	The Killer D

Championships and accomplishments

	Championship Wrestling Alliance

	CWA Heavyweight Championship (1 time)

	CWA Television Championship (1 time)

	Georgia Championship Wrestling

	NWA Georgia Tag Team Championship (4 times)  -  with Bob Armstrong

	NWA Macon Tag Team Championship (2 times)  -  with Jimmy Golden (1) and Don Muraco (1)

	National Wrestling Alliance*

	NWA Southeastern Heavyweight Championship (Northern Division) (4 times)

	NWA Florida

	PWF Tag Team Championship (1 time)  -  with Kendall Windham

	NWA Wrestle Birmingham Alababama Tag Team Championship (1 time)  -  with Jimmy Golden

	NWA National Tag Team titles (1 time)  -  with Jimmy Golden

	NWA Mid-America / Continental Wrestling Association

	AWA Southern Heavyweight Championship (2 times) 1

	AWA Southern Tag Team Championship (2 times)  -  with Toru Tanaka (1) and Bill Dundee) (1)

	CWA Tag Team Championship (3 times)  -  with Jimmy Golden (2) and Brian Lee (1)

	NWA Southern Heavyweight Championship (Memphis version) (1 time)

	NWA World Tag Team Championship (Mid-America Version) (1 time)  -  with Kevin Sullivan

	NWA United States Tag Team Championship (Mid-America version) (1 time)  -  with Ron Fuller

	Pro Wrestling Illustrated

	PWI ranked him #102 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 1991

	PWI ranked him #332 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the "PWI Years" in 2003

	PWI ranked him #80 of the top 100 tag teams of the "PWI Years" with Jimmy Golden in 2003

	Southeastern Championship Wrestling

	NWA Southeastern Continental Heavyweight Championship (2 times)

	NWA Southeastern Continental Tag Team Championship (2 times) - with Jimmy Golden

	NWA Southeastern Heavyweight Championship (Northern Division) (2 times)

	NWA Southeastern Tag Team Championship (15 times)  -  with Ron Fuller (2), Eddie Boulder (1), Jos LeDuc (3), Bob Armstrong (2), and Jimmy Golden (7)

	NWA Southeastern Television Championship (2 times)

	United States Wrestling Association

	USWA World Tag Team Championship (6 times)  -  with Brian Lee (2), Jeff Jarrett (3), and Mike Mitchell (1)

	USA Wrestling

	USA Heavyweight Championship (1 time)

	World Class Wrestling Association

	WCWA World Tag Team Championship (2 times)  -  with Jimmy Golden (1) and Brian Lee (1)

*Records aren't clear as to which NWA affiliated promotion Fuller wrestled for when 4 of his 6 total reigns with it began. While the title was usually defended only in the Southeastern Championship Wrestling promotion, it was occasionally used in others such as Georgia Championship Wrestling.


