
#Article: Gagik Tsarukyan
#Type: regular article

Gagik Tsarukyan (Գագիկ Ծառուկյան) is an Armenian businessman and politician. He is seen as the most influential of Armenia's government-connected "oligarchs" and key business partner of former President Robert Kocharyan, owning over a dozen big businesses and living in a large mansion on a hilltop overlooking the northern outskirts of Yerevan. He is better known in Armenia by his nickname "Dodi Gago" (Դոդի Գագո).

Tsarukyan is the founder and former leader of Prosperous Armenia political party and also the president of Armenia's National Olympic Committee (was reelected on December 4, 2008).

Tsarukyan graduated from Armenian State Institute of Physical Culture in 1989. He was involved in sports, mainly boxing, wrestling and arm wrestling. In 1996 Gagik Tsarukyan has become world champion in arm-wrestling, and in 1998 champion of Europe.

Since 1989 Tsarukyan has been engaged in entrepreneurship. In 1995 he founded and presided Multi Group" Concern group of companies which now includes more than 30 enterprises: "Kotayk" beer factory in Abovyan, Yerevan Chemical Pharmaceutical Company, "Mek" Network of Furniture Stores, Yerevan Ararat Brandy-Wine-Vodka Factory, etc. Tsarukyan is accused of depriving ownership rights of foreign investors in Yerevan Ararat Brandy-Wine-Vodka Factory.

Since 2003, Tsarukyan has been a RA National Assembly deputy. On May 25, 2003 he was elected as a deputy in the National Assembly of Armenia from District 42 after running unopposed, later becoming a member of the National Assembly's Standing Committee on Defense, National Security and Internal Affairs; he was not a member of a parliamentary faction during this term. In late 2005 he founded the Prosperous Armenia Party. During the first congress of Prosperous Armenia Party, on April 30, 2004, Tsarukyan was elected as its president. During the fourth congress of the party, on February 12, 2009, Tsarukyan was re-elected as the party president. He was re-elected to the National Assembly in the May 2007 parliamentary election from District 28 as a Prosperous Armenia candidate. Following this election he became head of the Prosperous Armenia parliamentary faction and a member of the Committee on the Protection of Human Rights and Public Affairs in June 2007.

Biography

Parents

Gagik Tsarukyan was born in Nikolay and Roza Tsarukyans’ family. Nikolay Tsarukyan, father of the family, is an electrical engineer by profession now is engaged in social activities. Roza Tsarukyan, Gagik Tsarukyan’s mother, is an accountant now is managing research-and-production center of "Multi Agro" LLC and at the same time is the honorable chairman of Prosperous Armenia Party Women council.

Childhood

Tsarukyan studied at Arinj village school. He met his future wife Javahir Tsarukyan in Arinj school, who was also studying at that same school. Tsarukyan was distinguished with physical abilities which influenced his higher education choices.

Family

Gagik Tsarukyan’s wife is Javahir Tsarukyan. They have 6 children.

Roza, Gayane and Emma Tsarukyans have graduated from Anania Shirakaci College with honors. Roza and Emma are studying at Yerevan State Medical University. Gayane Tsarukyan has graduated from Yerevan State University Faculty of Law with honors.

Anahit and  are studying at Anania Shirakaci College.

Hovhannes, the youngest member of the family, will go to school next year.

Career

Business interests

Tsarukyan started his business activities in the 1980s. During 1990-1992 Gagik Tsarukyan was the executive director of "Armenia" company and in 1992 he was involved in animal husbandry activities. He established a dairy production enterprise in Arinj village, Abovyan Region (now Kotayk Marz). In 1995 Gagik Tsarukyan founded and presided "Multi Group" concern which now includes Kotayk Abovyan beer factory, Yerevan Chemical Pharmaceutical Company, "Mek" Network of Furniture Stores, Yerevan Ararat Brandy-Wine-Vodka Factory, "Ararat" cement Factory,  "Aviaservice" JSC, "Multi Stone" stone Processing Company,  "Multi Rest House" Company, "Global Motors" CJSC, "Multi City House" Company and other companies and organizations.

In 2002, Yerevan Ararat Brandy-Wine-Vodka Factory was given a new lease of life after having a new owner and after becoming a part of Multi Group Concern. With the efforts made by Gagik Tsarukyan 50 million US dollar-equivalent Armenian drams were invested for the modernization and constructional works, in obtainment of new line of bottling and oak barrels.Gagik Tsarukyan took care of one matter the essence of which lies in the specialists and technologists of the factory restoring the factory's wealth of experience that was accumulated during many years of the company’s existence by means of the old manuscripts, museum exhibits and family archives. The lost glorious name Armenian Cognac was also restored. "Ararat" Brandy-Wine-Vodka Factory is one of the unique factories, where 50 and more years old cognac spirits are kept. Currently there are several claims pending at Armenian and international courts. A German investment fund accuses Multigroup of having deprived them from their right of ownership.

Gagik Tsarukyan and sports

Sports achievements

Tsarukyan took part in sports since his school years. He went for boxing, wrestling and arm wrestling. Tsarukyan graduated from Armenian State university of Physical Education in 1989 was a teacher of physical education and sports and also a wrestling coach. Tsarukyan had achievements in sports, in 1996 he was given a title of world champion in arm-wrestling, and in 1998 champion of Europe.

Armenian National Olympic Committee

Tsarukyan is the president of Armenian National Olympic Committee, was reelected in 2004. Armenian athletes under the leadership of Gagik Tsarukyan showed an unprecedented result during 2008 Beijing Olympic Games, returning with 6 bronze medals.

On December 4, 2008 Gagik Tsarukyan was unanimously reelected as NOCA president by the general assembly of Armenian National Olympic Committee.

Political Activity

Gagik Tsarukyan has been engaged in politics since 2000-s. Three years later during third convocation of National Assembly elections which took place on May 25, 2003 Gagik Tsarukyan was elected as NA deputy from 42 electoral district. During NA third convocation years Gagik Tsarukyan acted as independent deputy, was not represented in any faction or any deputy group. From 2003 till 2007 Gagik Tsarukyan was the member of RA NA Defense, National security and Interior affairs standing committee.

Prosperous Armenia Party establishment

Tsarukyan established Prosperous Armenia Party in 2004. That same year, during the party's first congress which took place on 30 April, Gagik Tsarukyan was elected as the president of the Party. As a result of the National Assembly elections of 12 May 2007, Prosperous Armenia Party received 204 443 votes receiving 25 mandates in NA. During the fourth congress of Prosperous Armenia Party which took place on February 12, 2009, Tsarukyan was reelected as its president. As a result of Prosperous Armenia Party fourth congress 93 member PAP political council was elected. Gagik Tsarukyan is the chairman of newly elected PAP Political council.

Gagik Tsarukyan-the chairman of NA Prosperous Armenia Party faction =

Prosperous Armenia Party has 27 deputies in Armenia's National Assembly and Prosperous Armenia faction led by Gagik Tsarukyan, is the second in NA by its number of representatives.  There are 25 members in "Prosperous Armenia" faction. Deputies Martun Grigoryan and Rustam Gasparyan are also the members of Prosperous Armenia Party.

Business assets

Tsarukian owns several businesses and rose to prominence in the late 1990s as a minority shareholder in a French-owned brewery in Abovian. His business holdings have since expanded, aided by his close ties with then President Robert Kocharian.

Tsarukian's holding company is "Multi Group" which comprises over 40 small and large businesses.  In March 2006, Tsarukian sold his 29 percent stake in the Kotayk brewery to French beer magnate Pierre Castel for about $4 million.

Businesses that are part of the Multi Group conglomerate include:

	 Multi Lion, an Armenian supplier of liquefied gas to households, cars and buses, is fifty percent owned by Multi Group and fifty percent owned by Aleksandr Sarkisian, the brother of Armenia's president Serge Sarkisian.

	 Multi Stone, stone processing company

	 Yerevan Ararat Brandy, Wine and Vodka Factory Currently there are several court hearings pending concerning the method used by Tsarukyan to gain sole ownership, including one by a German investment firm that accuses Tsarukyan of having illegally taken their stake in the company.

Low income reporting and tax payments

Despite maintaining an extravagant lifestyle, Tsarukian's companies post only modest revenues. His cement factory in Ararat—officially the most profitable of his businesses—occupies only the 45th place in the Armenian Statistical Service's annual ranking of tax payers, with tax contributions totaling 1.3 billion drams in 2007 (about $3.8 million USD in 2007). In contrast, another smaller Ararat-based plant (which smelts gold ore) paid more taxes despite standing idle during much of 2007 due to a change of ownership.

Despite being lucrative, the vast majority of Tsarukian's Multi Group businesses were not included in the list of the country's leading corporate taxpayers released by the Armenian government in early 2005.

Links to criminal leaders

Close ties between Pzo and Chairman of the Prosperous Armenia Party Gagik Tsarukyan were covered on media from time to time. Tsarukyan ensured Armen Ghazaryan's (nicknamed Pzo) safe entry to Armenia through the mediation of the former chief of Armenian Police Hayk Harutyunyan.

Awards and medals

In 2002 Tsarukyan was awarded with St. Grigor Lousavorich order by the Supreme Patriarch of all Armenians Garegin II highly evaluating Mr. Tsarukyan‘s activity towards church construction.

In 2003 upon the decree determined by the president of the Republic of Armenia Robert Kocharyan the president of Armenian National Olympic Committee Gagik Tsarukyan, who had his great input in the development of RA sports, was honored with Movses Khorenatsi medal.

On September 17, 2008 upon RA president Serzh Sargsyan decree, Tsarukyan was honored with "Services provided to the motherland" first rank medal for the great input he had in the development of RA sports and physical education.

On May 11, 2009 Tsarukyan was awarded with "European of the year" by the International European movement.

On September 12, 2009 European Judo Federation honored NOCA president Gagik Tsarukyan with gold medal.

Video Materials

	 

	 

	 

	 

	 

	 

	 GAGIK TSARUKYAN "Animal Cruelty"


