
#Article: Sékouba Konaté
#Type: regular article

Brigadier General Sékouba Konaté (born 6 June 1964) is an officer of the Guinean army and formerly served as the Vice President of its military junta, the National Council for Democracy and Development. After attending military academy, he received the nickname "El Tigre" for his action in battle, and gained such popularity with the people he was favored to be president of the government. However, he was appointed Vice-President; but took control of the country when the president was shot in December 2009.

Life

Konaté was born in Conakry in 1964 to Mandinka parents. He attended the Académie Militaire Royale in the Moroccan city of Meknes, graduating in 1990. He suffers from an unknown physical illness, possibly of his liver.

Military career

For his military prowess in combat, Konaté was nicknamed "El Tigre". He was trained as a parachutist, and fought in many battles in Guinea's military during 2000-2001. Because of his reputation as a soldier, many people supported him to be the junta leader: he is still popular with the people.

Political career

Guinea's President, Lansana Conté, died after a long illness in December 2008. The day afterwards, Moussa Camara, a military captain, stepped forward and declared Guinea to be under junta rule, with himself as the head. Konaté demanded that he be considered to rule the junta, and Camara and him drew lots to determine who would be President. After drawing twice, due to accusations of Camara cheating, Konaté was made the Vice President. He was also made the Minister of Defense.

On December 3, 2009, Camara was shot in an attempted assassination by his aide-de-camp, Aboubacar Diakité. While he was airlifted to Morocco for treatment, Konaté was placed in charge of the country. With Camara still in rehabilitation, the United States government has expressed its desire to see Camara kept out of Guinea and Konaté placed as head of the junta, because: "All of Camara’s actions were ill concealed attempts to take over… we’re not getting that same sense from Konate,” according to the United States Deputy Secretary of State William Fitzgerald.

In 2010, Konaté organized democratic elections, which were won by Alpha Condé. Following the transition of power, Konaté was appointed as the head of the African Union's military force.


