
#Article: Prakash Javadekar
#Type: regular article

Prakash Javadekar (born 30 January 1951) is an Indian politician and Member of Parliament Rajya Sabha and a leader of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). He was elected to Rajya Sabha from Maharashtra in 2008. He is the official spokesperson of theBJP. Javadekar is the incumbent Union Minister of State (Independent Charge) in the Government of India. He holds the portfolios of Environment and Forests and Parliamentary Affairs.

Early life

He was born in Pune to Keshav Krishna Javadekar and Ranjani Javadekar, a school teacher. He studied BCom from Pune. He was associated with ABVP from student days.

He worked with Bank of Maharashtra for 10 years from 1971- 1981. He also worked in Rural Development Dept Sick Unit Cell, Employment Promotion Pragramme of the Bank.

His father Keshav Krishna Javadekar was a senior leader of Hindu Maha Sabha and even lead its Pune unit as its President. His father was friend and follower of Veer Savarkar. He worked as Joint Editor of Marathi Daily started by Lokmanya Tilak - Kesari before having stints with some other newspapers like Tarun Bharat, Kaal as journalist. He still occasionally writes his thoughts in some newspapers. His mother is from Konkan region and was one of the first educated women from her area. Nowadays she conducts free classes of Vedic education for women.

Positions held

Present

	 Environment, Forest and Climate Change (Independent Charge)

	 Member of Parliament of India

	 National Spokesperson, Bharatiya Janata Party

	 President, GLOBE India (Global Legislators Organisation for Balanced Environment)

	 In-Charge, BJP Economic Forum and Cells related to Economy

	 President, NOINO (National Organisation of Insurance Officers)

	 President, KCKU (Khadi Commission Karmachari Union)

Committees

	 Member, Press Council of India

	 Member, Public Accounts Committee

	 Member, Standing Committee on Human Resources and Development

	 Member, Consultative Committee for Ministry of Power

	 Member, Committee on Subordinate Legislation

	 Member, Committee on Wakf

Previous posts held

Executive President, State Planning Board, Maharashtra (1995-1999)Member of Legislative Council - Maharashtra from Pune Division Graduate Constituency for 12 yrs (1990-2002)Chairman, Task Force on IT, Govt. of Maharashtra (1977-1999)Chairman, Working Group on "IT for Masses" Govt of India (2000)

Emergency days

Prakash Javadekar was a student political activist with the ABVP during emergency. He was arrested along with other students during emergency for leading a student movement in Pune. 

Complaint in Coal Mining Scam

On 31 May 2012 based on his complaint about various irregularities in coal mining, Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) directed a CBI enquiry. Reacting to this he said, "We have made a formal complaint to CVC because there were so many glaring lacunae which needed to be probed. If the inquiry has been ordered, it's good."

Personal life

Prakash has a sister who has MA, BEd and is working as a school teacher and one brother who is BCom working in central bank.

His wife is Dr Prachee Javadekar who is a former Director of Indira Institute of Management, Pune and a leading Education Consultant. He has two sons. First Dr Ashutosh Javadekar is a Dentist and Artist. Second Apoorva Javadekar is BCom, CA, FCA and MA (Economics), DSE MSC Financial Engineering, London and Pursuing PhD in Economics from Boston University.

Achievements

	 "Sir Purshottam Das Thakur Memorial" National Award, for research Papers on "Rural Development & Banks role in Co-ordinated approach".

	 Led delegation to Boston to Negotiate Media Lab Asia Project (2000)


