
#Article: R. N. Jayagopal
#Type: regular article

R. N. Jayagopal (1935 - 19 May 2008) was an Indian film director and lyricist in Kannada cinema. He had written over 12,000 film songs.

Early Life and Education

R. N. Jayagopal, known to friends and fans as RNJ, was born in 1935 to R. Nagendra Rao, another great of Kannada cinema. He did his primary and college education in Bangalore. He learnt Carnatic music from B. S. Raj Iyengar and was good at playing the violin.Jayagopal was one of four sons of his parents. His other famous siblings were older brother R. N. Krishna Prasad, who was an award winning cinematographer, and younger brother R. N. Sudarshan, a veteran film actor and producer.

Career

Jayagopal entered the film industry by writing the lyrics of "Tribhuvana Janani Jaganmohini" for the 1957 film Premada Putri produced by his father. From then on, he wrote script, dialogue and lyrics for hundreds of films. He had directed eight films, including Dhumaketu, Kesarina Kamala and Avala Antaranga. He won the State award as best dialogue writer for Namma Makkalu and Pallavi Anu Pallavi, which was Mani Ratnam's first film.

He did direct many serials as well, but he remained preoccupied by writing lyrics for Kannada films. His lyrics were meaningful and had a high degree of lyrical value. Many of his songs have been hugely successful not only for the tune composition, but as well for the quality of the songs.

Jayagopal worked in the company of other great writers like Chi. Udaya Shankar, Vijaya Narasimha, Sorat Aswath, Hunsur Krishnamurthy and others.

Jayagopal started the first school in Chennai to offer Kannada as a second language - Vidya Vinaya Vinoda Mat. Hr. Sec. School. He also made his mark in the Tamil film industry with his well acclaimed roles in movies like Nayagan and Michael Madana Kama Rajan.

Notable Lyrics

	 Haadonda Haaduve Nee Kelu Maguve

	 Neerinalli Aleya Ungura

	 Sanyaasi Sanyaasi Arjuna Sanyaasi

	 Bellimodadha Anchinindha

	 Gaganavu Ello Bhoomiyu Ello

	 Nee Bandu Nintaga Nintu Neenu Nakkaga

	 Nagu Endhidhe Manjina Bindu

	 Naguva Nayana Madhura Mouna

	 Raagake Swaravagi, Swarake Padavaagi

	 Noorondu Nenapu Yedeyaaladinda

	 Premada Kaadambari Baredanu Kanneerali

Filmography

As lyricist

As director

Awards

	 Karnataka State Film Awards

	 Best Dialogue - Namma Makkalu (1969)

	 Best Dialogue - Pallavi Anu Pallavi (1983)

	 Special Award (Lyrics) - Swabhimana (1985)

Death

He died on May 19, 2008 at the age of 72 following a cardiac arrest. His wife Lalita Jayagopal died two years later, on June 13, 2010.


