
#Article: Raymond Arroyo
#Type: regular article

Raymond Arroyo is a New York Times bestselling author, and a producer. He is the news director and lead anchor of EWTN News, the news division of the Eternal Word Television Network, a Catholic broadcast network founded by Mother Angelica, a nun of the Poor Clare order. He is creator and host of the news magazine The World Over Live.

Biography

Personal life

Raymond Arroyo is from New Orleans, Louisiana. He lives in Northern Virginia with his wife Rebecca and their three children.

Career

Arroyo graduated from the New York University Tisch School of the Arts where he studied with Stella Adler, Uta Hagen, and others. Prior to working at EWTN, Arroyo worked at the Associated Press, the New York Observer, and for the political columnist team of Evans and Novak. He is best known as host of the EWTN news program The World Over Live, where he has interviewed many Catholic figures including the first and, to this date, only English language conversation ever recorded with Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, who would later become Pope Benedict XVI. Other interviews include Mel Gibson, who was interviewed on the set of his film The Passion of the Christ. Many of his political guests are conservative Republicans: Paul Ryan, Clarence Thomas, Rick Santorum, Ken Cuccinelli, Pat Buchanan, et al. Arroyo's biography of EWTN's founder, Mother Angelica, was a New York Times bestseller, as were each of his following books. He is also the editor of Mother Angelica's Little Book of Life Lessons and Everyday Spirituality (Doubleday), "Mother Angelica's Private and Pithy Lessons from the Scriptures" (Doubleday), "The Prayers and Personal Devotions of Mother Angelica" (Doubleday), and co-author of, "Of Thee I Zing: America's Cultural Decline from Muffin Tops to Body Shots" (Threshold Editions). He has been featured on The Today Show, Good Morning America, and Access Hollywood, "Hannity and Colmes", “CNN Headline News”, and other television shows. He is a frequent guest, and occasional substitute host, of "The Laura Ingraham Show" on radio. His writings have been published by Newsweek, The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Times, The Financial Times, and The National Catholic Register.

Books


