
#Article: Ray Tenorio
#Type: regular article

Raymond "Ray" Tenorio (born February 8, 1965) is a Guamanian Republican politician and former police officer. Tenorio served as a Senator in the Legislature of Guam from January 2003. He took office as the 9th Lieutenant Governor of Guam on January 3, 2011, having won the gubernatorial election in November 2010 with current Governor Eddie Calvo.

Biography

Personal life

Tenorio was born Raymond Waddey Jr. on February 8, 1965 in Orlando, Florida. He was raised in Orlando by his birth father until he was sent to live in a foster home. His mother, Helen V. Eubank, located him at a foster home in Tennessee. She took Ray with her to Guam when he was approximately ten years old. Eubank then adopted the surname of her new husband, Tenorio, after they arrived in Guam. Ray's stepfather, Romeo Mantanona Tenorio, a police officer, enrolled Ray in middle school under the name Ray Tenorio. In 2010, Tenorio explained that from that point he used Tenorio as his surname, and he did not realize that his legal surname was still Waddey until he applied for a U.S. passport to visit Japan twenty years after middle school. In 1997, Ray had his surname legally changed from Waddey to Tenorio. Tenorio and his first wife, Evangeline Marcus, have five children - LaDonna, Nicole, Raymond Jr., Rome Scott and Richard. The couple divorced in February 1996. Tenorio is currently married to his second wife, Naoko G. Shimizu. They reside in Yigo, Guam. Tenorio is an avid World of Warcraft player with a character in the guild Biscuit Front.

Education

Tenorio graduated from George Washington High School on Guam in 1983. He earned a Criminal Justice Academy certificate from Guam Community College in 1984. Tenorio received a bachelor's degree in public administration from the University of Guam in 2000 and a master's degree, also in public administration, from the University of Guam in July 2011.

Career

Tenorio served as a police officer in the Guam Police Department for fourteen years. He has also worked as the president of Trace Investigation Inc. and Denanche Security Agency.

Tenorio was first elected to be Senator in the Guam Legislature in the November 2002 election. He garnered the highest votes in both 2002 and 2004 elections. Tenorio first swore an oath as Senator in January 2003 to become a member of the 27th Guam Legislature and served four consecutive terms, including the 28th, 29th and 30th Guam Legislatures, before becoming Lt. Governor in 2011.

Lt. Governor of Guam

Republican gubernatorial candidate and Minority Leader Eddie Calvo chose Tenorio as his running mate for Lieutenant Governor of Guam in the 2010 gubernatorial election. Calvo and Tenorio defeated their Republican opponents, Lt. Governor Michael Cruz and running mate James Espaldon, in the Republican primary election on September 3, 2010. The Republican ticket of Eddie Calvo and Ray Tenorio narrowly won the 2010 Guam gubernatorial election by approximately 500 votes over the Democratic ticket of former Governor Carl Gutierrez and Frank Aguon. Calvo and Tenorio were sworn into office on January 3, 2011, at the Plaza de España in Hagåtña. Their opponents, Gutierrez and Aguon, filed an unsuccessful lawsuit challenging the results and asking the courts to order a new gubernatorial election.

Legislative history

30th Guam Legislature Jan. 2009-Jan. 2011

	Assistant Minority Leader

	Vice Chairman, Committee on Public Safety, Law Enforcement & Senior Citizens

	Member, Committee on Education

	Member, Committee on Tourism, Cultural Affairs, Public Broadcasting and Youth

	Member, Committee on Municipal Affairs, Aviation, Housing & Recreation

	Member, Committee on the Guam Military Buildup and Homeland Security

	Member, Committee on Utilities, Transportation, Public Works & Veterans Affairs

	Member, Committee on Labor, Public Structure, Public Libraries & Technology

	Member, Committee on Economic Development, Health & Human Services and Judiciary

29th Guam Legislature Jan. 2007-Jan. 2009

	Acting Speaker

	Vice Speaker

	Legislative Secretary

	Chairman, Committee on Criminal Justice, Public Safety and Youth

	Member, Executive Committee

	Member, Committee on Aviation, Federal Affairs, Labor, Housing, Banking and Insurance

	Member, Committee on Tourism, Maritime, Military, Veterans and Foreign Affairs

	Member, Committee on Education, General & Omnibus Affairs

	Member, Committee on Finance, Taxation, Commerce & Economic Development

28th Guam Legislature Jan. 2005-Jan. 2007

	Majority Leader

	Chairman, Committee on Criminal Justice, Public Safety and Youth & Foreign Affairs

	Vice Chairman, Committee on Education & Community Development

	Member, Committee on Finance, Taxation & Commerce

	Member, Committee on Health & Human Services

	Member, Committee on Natural Resources, Utilities & Micronesian Affairs

	Member, Committee on Aviation, Immigration, Labor & Housing

	Member, Committee on Judiciary, Governmental Operations & Reorganization

	Member, Committee on General and Omnibus Matters

27th Guam Legislature Jan. 2003-Jan. 2005

	Minority Whip

	Member, Committee on Utilities & Land

	Member, Committee on Health

	Member, Subcommittee on Restoration of the Guam Legislature Building

	President, Trace Investigations, Inc., 1997-2002

	President, Denanche Security Agency, 1995-2002

	Police Officer, Guam Police Department, 1984-1997


