
#Article: Ravi Teja
#Type: regular article

 Ravi Teja (born Ravi Shankar Raju Bhupatiraju) is an Indian film actor known for his work in Telugu cinema. He won the Nandi Special Jury Award in 1999 and 2002 for his performance in the films Nee Kosam and Khadgam and also won the state Nandi Award for best actor in his film Neninthe in 2008.

He started his career as a supporting artist in Karthavyam (1990) and subsequently played small roles in the films Chaitanya (1991), Aaj Ka Goonda Raj (1992), Allari Priyudu (1993) and Ninne Pelladata (1996). Teja also became an assistant director and worked in several Bollywood and Telugu projects.

His other works include Sindhooram , Idiot, Avunu Valliddaru Ista Paddaru, Khadgam, Amma Nanna O Tamila Ammayi, Venky, Naa Autograph, Bhadra, Vikramarkudu, Dubai Seenu, Krishna, Kick and its sequel, Don Seenu, Mirapakay, Balupu and Power.

In 2012, He was listed 50th in the Forbes India list of top 100 Celebrities, with an annual income of . In 2013, his annual earnings are .

Early life

He was born to Raj Gopal Raju and Rajya Lakshmi Bhupatiraju in the village of Jaggampeta, Andhra Pradesh, India. Teja 's father was a pharmacist and his mother was a homemaker. He is the eldest of three sons, the others being Bharath and Raghu, who are also actors. Teja spent most of his childhood in Northern India because his father used to move very often due to his work. His schooling was in Jaipur, Delhi, Mumbai and Bhopal.  Teja completed his schooling at N.S.M. Public School, Vijayawada. Later on he completed his Bachelors in Arts at Siddhartha Degree College, Vijayawada. In 1988 he went to Chennai to start his career in films.

Career

(1990-1996)

In his early years working in Chennai, YVS Chowdary and Gunasekhar were his roommates. He had small roles in the films Karthavyam (1990), Chaitanya (1991) and Aaj Ka Goonda Raj (1992). Ravi became an assistant director, working in both television and film. As an assistant director, he worked in several Bollywood as well as Telugu projects including Prathibandh, Aaj Ka Goondaraj, and Criminal. He met Krishna Vamsi and worked as an assistant director under him for the 1996 hit film Ninne Pelladutha. Vamsi also gave Ravi an opportunity to act in a small role in that film. He continued to work as an assistant director for few other films.

(1997-2000)

In 1997, while still working as an assistant director, Ravi Teja got an opportunity to act in the film Sindhooram directed by Krishna Vamsi as a lead actor. The film won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Telugu. 

Ravi Teja followed up with roles in the films Seetha Rama Raju, Padutha Teeyaga, Manasichhi Choodu and Krishna Reddy's Premaku Velayara. In 1999, he was cast in a leading role by Srinu Vaitla for Nee Kosam . The film w won the Silver Nandi for Best Film. Ravi Teja won the Nandi Award for Best Actor Special Jury for his performance . Following this, he started appearing in more significant roles such as Krishna Vamsi's Samudram, Chiranjeevi's Annayya and Budget Padmanabham. He also appeared in lead roles in multi-starrer films such as Kshemanga Velli Labanga Randi, Tirumala Tirupathi Venkatesa, Sakuntumba Sapari Vare Sametham and Ammayi Kosam.

(2001-2005)

In 2001, Ravi Teja's association with Puri Jagannadh began when he cast Ravi as the lead role in Itlu Sravani Subramanyam. The movie was a commercial hit and got Ravi Teja credibility as a solo lead actor. In 2002, his next film Avunu Valliddaru Ista Paddaru, directed by Vamsy and co-starring Kalyani was released. The film was a successful at the box office and won Ravi acclaim. The year also saw Ravi in Idiot. Directed by Puri Jagannadh and co-starring Rakshita, was a blockbuster hit and Ravi's performance and dialogue delivery were praised by critics and movie-goers alike.

The year also saw the release of Krishna Vamsi's Khadgam. The movie was a huge success at the box office and won Sarojini Devi Award for a Film on National Integration. Ravi's portrayal of a young wannabe actor won him the Nandi Special Jury Award for the second time. In 2003, Ravi again worked with director Puri Jagannadh for Amma Nanna O Tamila Ammayi. The film co-starring Asin became a blockbuster hit and Jeevi of Idlebrain praised him, "Ravi Teja did well. His strength lies in his dialogue delivery and reckless body language". The year also saw Ravi working in commercially successful films like Dongodu, co-starring Kalyani and directed by Srinivas Bheemineni and Veede, co-starring Aarthi Agarwal and directed by Ravi Raja Pinisetty. In the same year, Ravi was also seen in films like Ee Abbayee Chala Manchodu, Anveshana and Oka Raju Oka Rani, which failed to do well at the box office.

In 2004, Ravi Teja co-starred in Venky, directed by Srinu Vaitla. . Idlebrain wrote, "His comedy is very good in the first half. His antics with Siddanthi and the way he curses himself in front of the mirror is hilarious". He appeared in Naa Autograph directed by cinematographer turned director S. Gopal Reddy. A critic from nowrunning.com wrote, "Ravi Teja delivers a stunning performance as a dejected lover".  Chanti was directed by Sobhan . In 2005, Ravi Teja's work included Bhadra directed by Boyapati Srinu and Bhageeratha, directed by Rasool Ellore. He also worked in the crime film Shock, directed by Harish Shankar and produced by Ram Gopal Varma.

(2006-2011)

In 2006, Ravi Teja worked with director S. S. Rajamouli for Vikramarkudu. Jeevi praised his performance, "Vikramarkudu is the best film of Ravi Teja so far in histrionics aspect. He did both characters of Athali Sathi Babu and Vikram Rathod equally well, His mannerism of ‘jintata’ is simply superb". Later in 2006, Ravi Teja acted in Khatarnak. In 2007, Ravi Teja worked for the third time with director Srinu Vaitla for Dubai Seenu. He also did a cameo in Chiranjeevi's Shankar Dada Zindabad. In 2008, Ravi Teja acted in Krishna directed by V. V. Vinayak.In August 2008, Ravi Teja acted in Baladur. Later in the year, Ravi Teja again collaborated with director Puri Jagganath for Neninthe. Although the film was not successful at the box office, Ravi Teja's portrayal of an up-and-coming assistant director in the film received acclaim.

In 2009, Ravi Teja worked with director Surender Reddy for Kick. Later that year, he appeared in Anjaneyulu. In 2010, his films included Shambo Shiva Shambo and Don Seenu, directed by Gopichand Malineni.

His first release in 2011 was Harish Shankar's Mirapakay. He later starred in Ram Gopal Varma's Dongala Mutha and made a cameo appearance in Katha Screenplay Darshakatvam Appalaraju, also directed by Ram Gopal Varma. His last release of the year was Ramesh Varma's Veera .

(2012-present)

His first release in 2012 was Gunasekhar's Nippu. His next release was Siva's Daruvu. His next release was Puri Jagannadh's Devudu Chesina Manushulu. His last release in 2012 was Parasuram's Sarocharu  Rediff.com wrote "Ravi Teja is in a different avatar, a more subdued one. A change of image and role is necessary for an actor and Ravi Teja makes the transition fairly well."

His release in 2013 was Gopichand Malineni's action entertainer Balupu . The Times of India wrote "Ravi Teja has come up with an entertaining performance. His characterization and the flashback episode as Kancharapalem Shankar looked very powerful on the screen. He gets into the skin of the character and has done well." The film turned one of the biggest critical and commercial success of the year,

In 2014, he made cameo appearance in Sairam Shankar's Romeo  and Power with debutant director K. S. Ravindra.

In 2015, he starred in  Kick 2 directed by Surender Reddy and produced by Nandamuri Kalyan Ram. After this he started a film titled Bengal Tiger  directed by Sampath Nandi.

In late October 2015, he started a new movie titled Yevado Okadu under his long time friend Dil Raju's production, which is directed by Venu Sri Ram. Later he named Sudheer Varma as the director for his next movie which starts in mid 2016.

Brand endorsement

Ravi Teja was signed in as brand ambassador for Lunar - footwear and sandals in the two states, AP and Telangana. He later endorsed the liquor brand, Lord & Master.

Filmography

Below are the selected filmography of Ravi Teja.

	1997: Sindhooram as Chanti

	1999: Premaku Velayara as Ravi

	1999: Nee Kosam as Ravi

	2000: Annayya as Ravi

	2001: Itlu Sravani Subramanyam as Subramanyam

	2002: Avunu Valliddaru Ista Paddaru as Anil

	2002: Idiot as Chanti

	2002: Khadgam as Koti

	2003: Amma Nanna O Tamila Ammayi as Chandu

	2004: Venky as Venky

	2004: Naa Autograph as Seenu

	2005: Bhadra as Bhadra

	2006: Vikramarkudu as Athili Sathi Babu/ASP Vikram Singh Rathod

	2007: Dubai Seenu as Srinivas 

	2008: Krishna as Krishna

	2009: Kick  as Kalyan

	2010: Shambo Shiva Shambo as Karna

	2010: Don Seenu as Don Seenu

	2011: Mirapakay as Rishikesh

	2013: Balupu as Ravi/Balupu Shankar

	2014: Power as Thirupathi/ACP Baldev Sahay

	2015: Kick 2 as Robin Hood

	2015: Bengal Tiger as Akash Narayan

See also

	 List of Indian film actors


