
#Article: Regan Burns
#Type: regular article

Regan Burns (born June 14, 1968) is an American actor and comedian. He is known for various small roles in TV commercials and programs. Burns's humor is often characterized by his high, enthusiastic voice tone and somewhat gawky, wide-eyed facial expressions. He often appears in the British "Dave and Brad" adverts of the Vehicle company Enterprise Rent-A-Car.

Career

Burns hosted the game show Oblivious, in which Burns acted as someone or something (an artist or golf instructor, for instance) and asked a contestant a series of five questions in conversation. The contestant wouldnt realize it was a hoax until all questions had been asked. They would then receive money for answering questions.

Burnss other work include commentary for several E! shows. He played the arsonist Alan Shepard on Comedy Centrals Halfway Home and plays a recurring character on Fox News Channels The 1/2 Hour News Hour. He also appeared as a citizen of Reno, Nevada in the Reno 911! episode The Tanning Booth Incident and had a cameo in the direct-to-DVD movie Get Smarts Bruce and Lloyd: Out of Control as a lab tech.

His work is mainly seen in TV commercials, as he has appeared in various ads for Arbys, Capital One, Volkswagen, Holiday Inn, Enterprise Rent-A-Car, Boston Pizza, Ooma, and others. Burns has also played "Beerman" in commercials for Coors Light. He appeared in the Back to You episode "A Gentleman Always Leads," which aired October 10, 2007.

In December 2007, he appeared as a cashier in a corporate stunt by Burger King titled "Whopper Freakout" where a United States Burger King franchise informs its customers the signature Whopper has been discontinued. He also appeared as a director in a second season episode of Supernatural.

In July 2010, Burns appeared in an episode of Disney Channels Sonny With a Chance. He has also appeared in an episode of Disney XDs Im in the Band. In August 2010, Burns appeared in Zeke and Luther.

Since March 2009, Burns has been a regular film review contributor (usually Thursday or Fridays) on The Marc Germain Show, on TalkRadioOne.com.Since 2012, Burns has starred as Bennett James in Dog with a Blog.

Filmography

Films

Television


