
#Article: Dhanin Chearavanont
#Type: regular article

Dhanin Chearavanont (ธนิน เจียรวนนท์, Chinese: 谢国民) (born 1939) is a Thai businessman and investor based in Bangkok. As of Forbes 2013 List of World Billionaires, Chearavanont is placed 58th with a net worth of $14.3 billion, making him the richest person in Thailand and in Southeast Asia. 

Chearavanont was born in 1939.

Dhanin and family own the Charoen Pokhphand Group (C.P. Group). C.P. Group's holdings generated cumulative revenues of approximately $46.5 billion and holds about $50.1 billion in assets. It is the largest shareholder in Ping An Insurance, a Chinese life insurance company with $461 billion in assets (2012). The C.P. Group is also the second largest shareholder in Itochu Corporation of Japan. Itochu reported revenues of over $141 billion in FY2013. 

Dhanin Chearavanont's father, Chia Ek Chor, and uncle, Chia Seow Hui, left China for Bangkok in the 1920s to begin selling seeds and agricultural chemicals. Their business diversified geographically across Asia, and vertically via a number of technology ventures and contract farming initiatives. In the 1980s, as China opened up to foreign firms, the Charoen Pokphand Group became the preferred partner for international brands such as Honda, Wal Mart, and Tesco.

The C.P. Group is one of Asia's largest conglomerates and operates in agriculture, telecommunications, marketing, distribution and logistics, international trading, petrochemicals, property and land development, crop integration, insurance, automotive, and pet foods.

Family businesses

	CP Group (Main parent company for all companies listed below) 

	Ping An Insurance (Largest Shareholder, China's second largest life insurer). 

	CP ALL (Thailand, third largest Seven Eleven Chain in the world with over 6,000 stores.) 

	Charoen Pokphand Foods (CPF Global, with operations in dozens of countries. CPF is the world's largest producer of shrimp, animal feed, and the world's third largest chicken and pork producer). 

	True Corporation (Largest Internet Service Provider, Cable Television Network, and third largest Wireless Carrier in Thailand). 

	Siam Makro (Largest Cash & Carry retailer in Thailand). 

	Chesters Grill (Major fast food chain in Thailand). 

	Dayang Motos (China's third largest motorcycle manufacturer). 

	CP PC (Major plastic production manufacturer with plants in Thailand, China, and Vietnam). 

	Lotus Supermarket Chain (China)

	Super Brand Mall, Shanghai.

	True Growth Infrastructure Fund (A $2 billion fund set up to manage True's extensive telecommunication assets including Thailand's largest fibre optic network and largest 3G & 4G cell networks. It became Thailand's second largest IPO ever in late 2013. True Corp is True GIF's largest shareholder.)

	C.P. Pokphand Listed in Hong Kong, CPP is one of the world's largest producers of feed and one of China's leading agricultural companies with factories nationwide. 

	C.P. Fresh MartA Thai based chain selling frozen foods and finished products, now has over 700 branches. 

	C.P. Land C.P. Land manages several Bangkok properties including C.P. Tower 1 & 2. It is listed through C.P. Land Infrastructure Fund and has a market capitalization of over U.S.$300 million.

	Concordian International School (Thailand).

	Magnolia Quality Development Corporation Limited (Thailand).


