
#Article: Richard S. Newcombe
#Type: regular article

Richard S. Newcombe (born August 8, 1950) is the founder and chairman of Creators Syndicate, an American independent distributor of comic strips and syndicated columns to daily newspapers, websites and other digital outlets located in Hermosa Beach, California.

Early life

Richard S. Newcombe was born on August 8, 1950, in Chicago, Illinois, to a prominent newspaper family. Newcombe's father, Leo Newcombe, served as senior vice president for the newspaper division of Field Enterprises and business manager and later as general manager of the Chicago Daily News and the Chicago Sun-Times. Leo and Ann Newcombe had eight children, and they lived in Winnetka, Illinois. In 1969, Rick Newcombe was one of the first graduates of La Lumiere School, an educational institution founded in 1963 in La Porte, Indiana, as a boarding and day school for boys. U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts was also an early graduate of La Lumiere, which has had fewer than 2,000 graduates since its founding. Newcombe then attended Georgetown University, where he was one of the founding editors of The Georgetown Voice, was a member of Phi Beta Kappa, and graduated magnum cum laude.

Career

Publishing

After graduating from Georgetown University in 1972, Newcombe worked as a reporter and editor at United Press International for four years. He also worked toward an MBA degree at the graduate business school at the University of Chicago. From 1978 to 1984, Newcombe served as vice president and general manager of the Los Angeles Times Syndicate. In 1984, he became president of News America Syndicate, which then was the third-largest syndicate in the world and owned by Rupert Murdoch. Three years later, Newcombe left News America Syndicate to form Creators Syndicate, an American independent distributor of comic strips and syndicated columns to daily newspapers and websites. Creators Syndicate was founded in Los Angeles on February 13, 1987, and moved to Hermosa Beach, California, in 2012.

Within six months of forming his syndication company, Newcombe had acquired the syndication rights to Ann Landers, then the world's most read and widely syndicated newspaper columnist, the comic strip B.C., and the cartoon works of Herblock, The Washington Post’s legendary editorial cartoonist. In addition to Herblock, Newcombe has also worked with Bill Mauldin, Michael Ramirez, Paul Conrad, Mike Luckovich, Paul Szep and Steve Breen.

Over the years, Newcombe has syndicated some of the most influential and occasionally controversial figures of our time, including Pope John Paul II, Richard Nixon, Hillary Clinton, Jimmy Carter, Nancy Reagan, Henry Kissinger, Erma Bombeck, Art Buchwald, Joyce Jillson, Jeane Dixon, Sydney Omarr, Carl Rowan, Robert Novak, Dan Quayle and Oliver North. Newcombe also has syndicated Bill O'Reilly, Molly Ivins, Larry Kudlow, John Stossel, Hunter S. Thompson, Arianna Huffington, Tony Kornheiser, Patrick Buchanan, Thomas Sowell, Walter E. Williams, Michelle Malkin, Mona Charen, Mark Shields and Susan Estrich.

Author

Newcombe is also an avid weightlifter, pipe collector and writer. He contributed to the 1983 book The Businessman's Minutes-A-Day Guide to Shaping Up, by former champion bodybuilder and Italian actor Dr. Franco Columbu. He wrote the book In Search of Pipe Dreams (2003), which was translated into Mandarin and German, titled Der Traum vom Pfeifenrauchen in German (translation: The Dream of Pipe Smoking) (2007). He also wrote Still Searching for Pipe Dreams in 2010. In 2012, Newcombe contributed to the books Scandinavian Pipemakers, by Jan Andersson, and Shoulder Pain? the Solution and Prevention, by Dr. John Kirsch.

Newcombe asserts that all forms of success in life are the result of setting goals, believing that only positive results will materialize, and having discipline in one’s work to turn dreams into reality. A positive outlook and affirmative thinking are cornerstones of how Newcombe leads his life.


