
#Article: Richard Sezibera
#Type: regular article

Richard Sezibera (born June 5, 1964 in Kigali, Rwanda) is a Rwandan physician, politician, diplomat and civil servant. He is the current Secretary General of the East African Community. He was appointed to that position by the East African Community Heads of State on 19 April 2011 for a five-year term.

Early life and education

Sezibera was born on 5 June 1964, in Kigali, Rwanda.

Sezibera received his early education in Burundi. In 1984, he entered Makerere University Medical School in Kampala, Uganda, graduating with the degree of Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBChB) in 1989. Later, he obtained the degree of Master of Arts (MA) in Liberal Studies from Georgetown University in the United States.

Work experience

Following his graduation at Makerere University, he worked at Mbuya Hospital in Kampala, Uganda, before transferring to Mbale Regional Referral Hospital in Mbale, Eastern Uganda. Sometime prior to 1994, he joined the Rwanda Patriotic Front (RPF), as a field medical officer. He rose to the rank of Major within the RPF. In July 1994, Dr. Sezibera was appointed Physician to the President of the Republic of Rwanda. In this position, he concurrently served as military aide to the President of Rwanda. In 1995, he became a Member of Parliament. He was elected President of the Parliamentary Commission on Social Affairs, which exercised oversight over the government departments mandated to deal with issues of health. In 1999, he was appointed Ambassador of Rwanda to the United States of America, with concurrent accreditation to Mexico, Argentina and Brazil. In 2008, Dr. Sezibera was appointed Minister of Health in the Rwandan cabinet, a position he held until he was appointed East African Community Secretary General.

Land and population

In the 2009, BBC Horizon documentary, "How Many People Can Live on Planet Earth?" with David Attenborough, Sezibera said:

Personal life

Sezibera is married to Eustochie Sezibera. Together, they are the parents of five children; one daughter and four sons. He is a member of the Rwanda Medical Association.

See also

	East African Community


