
#Article: Richard Stewart
#Type: regular article

Richard Stewart (born 1958 or 1959) is the current mayor for the city of Coquitlam, British Columbia. Stewart was elected to Coquitlam City Council in 2005.

Personal life

Stewart has lived all his life in Coquitlam. He was married in 1983 to Anna Rosa, they have four children. Stewart has served his community in the provincial government as MLA for Coquitlam-Maillardville 2001-2005; appointed MLA Responsible for Francophone Affairs, member of the Government Caucus Committee on the Economy, and Chair of the Select Standing Committee on Education.

Stewart is bilingual, speaking English and French.

Stewart has experience as a community volunteer in a large number of social, service, environmental, business and community organizations, including the Coquitlam Rotary Club, the Knights of Columbus, the Maillardville Lions Club, the Société Maillardville Uni and Société Francophone de Maillardville.

Career

Stewart was previously President of the Canadian Home Builders' Association of British Columbia, Chair of the National Housing Economic Research Council, a member of the BC Minister’s Advisory Council on Affordable Housing, a member of National and BC Building Code Committees, and a member of the National Research Council Canada’s Standing Committee on Housing.

At the local government level, Stewart has served on Economic Development Committees, on a local Advisory Design Panel, on Housing Committees, and as a Trustee on the Coquitlam Public Library Board. Stewart is a writer, and has operated his own publishing, government relations and communications business.

On November 15, 2008, Stewart was elected as mayor of Coquitlam in the British Columbia municipal elections, beating out incumbent Maxine Wilson.

City Councillor committees

	 Chair of the Livable Communities Advisory Committee

	 Chair of the Disability Issues Advisory Committee

	 Chair of the Maillardville Revitalization Committee

	 Member of the GVRD Labour Relations Bureau

	 Chair of the Parcel Tax Review Panel

	 Council representative to the Fraser-Burrard Community Justice Society

	 Member of the Executive of Lower Mainland Municipal Association


