
#Article: Ricca Slone
#Type: regular article

Ricca Slone (born February 19, 1947) is a former member of the Illinois House of Representatives who represented the 92nd District from 1997 to 2005.

Early life and education

Slone was born in Ottawa, Ontario and grew up in Chicago, Illinois. Slone received her B.A. from Washington University in St. Louis. She obtained an M.A. in anthropology at the University of California, Los Angeles. She also has an M.A. in public administration from Ohio State University and a J.D. from the University of Illinois College of Law. She holds an advanced certificate in international law from Chicago-Kent College of Law.

Career

Slone is an attorney whose work concentrates on environmental compliance and real estate transactions for small business. She has served on the Peoria City-County Landfill Committee. Slone previously worked at the Office of Policy Development & Research at the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. During the Reagan administration, she worked at the United States Office of Management and Budget. Slone has worked as a consultant on regional water supply policy and as a lobbyist for the Environmental Law and Policy Center. She currently serves as a lecturer in the Master of Public Policy program at Northwestern University.

Family

Slone is married to Dr. William Berkman. They have three sons; Zachary, Sydney, and Seth. 

Committee assignments

Slone served on the following committees in the Illinois General Assembly:

	 Appropriations-Higher Education (Chairperson)

	 Environment and Energy (Vice-Chairperson)

	 Health Care Availability Access

	 Housing & Urban Development

	 Local Government

	 Subcommittee on Electric Deregulation 

	 Committee of the Whole

	 Subcommittee on Transit

Electoral history

Slone was named Legislator of the Year by the Illinois Environmental Council. Slone served in the Illinois House of Representatives from 1997 through 2005. She lost to Republican Aaron Schock in the 2004 general election. 


