
#Article: Rob Morrison
#Type: regular article

Rob Morrison is an American former television journalist and news anchor.

Career

Morrison began his broadcasting career as a combat correspondent while serving in the U.S. Marine Corps. He was a radio disc jockey and news anchor and reporter while stationed on Okinawa, Japan, in the early 1990s. As a civilian, Morrison began his career at WGMC-TV in Worcester, Massachusetts. He later worked at WWLP-TV in Springfield, Massachusetts, and in Hartford, Connecticut. As a foreign correspondent, he reported from Iraq and Qatar during the Second Gulf War; Afghanistan, where he embedded with the Marines during Operation Enduring Freedom in 2001; and Haiti.

In 1999, Morrison began a nine-year period at WNBC, the New York City, flagship station of the NBC broadcast-television network.  There he co-anchored Today in New York and Weekend Today in New York, the station's early-morning, local-news-and-entertainment television program.  In 2001, Morrison moved to the station's weekend-evening newscasts.

In 2004, he was made a co-anchor of the weekday edition of Today in New York, alongside Darlene Rodriguez, and stayed in that position until 2008 when he left the station. During Morrison's time with WNBC, he also served as a correspondent for NBC News, as well as a news reader for Weekend Today, also an early-morning, news-and-entertainment television program and a production of NBC News.

After leaving WNBC and NBC, Morrison wrote a blog, Daddy Diaries Confessions of a Stay-at-Home Anchorman, which was published on The Huffington Post, a news website and content-aggregating blog. In 2009, he joined WCBS, a local broadcast-television station also located in New York City and the flagship station of the CBS broadcast-television network where Morrison has anchored the station's morning and evening weekend newscasts. On December 20, 2010, he was named co-anchor, with Mary Calvi, of the weekday editions of CBS 2 News This Morning, the station's early-morning news program, and on newscasts beginning January 3, 2011.

On February 20, 2013, Morrison resigned from his $300,000-a-year position at WCBS-TV.

Personal life

His wife, Ashley Morrison (née Risk), a business anchor for CBS MoneyWatch, was an anchor and reporter with Bloomberg Television from 2007 to 2009. In 2011, the couple and their son, Jack, moved from Manhattan to Darien, Connecticut.

Domestic violence

In 2009, New York City police had arrested Morrison for allegedly assaulting his wife while the couple lived in Manhattan. Darien police had been called to their Connecticut home on October 17, 2011, arresting Morrison for disorderly conduct in an incident involving his wife, and responded to another domestic disturbance there on January 19, 2013.

Morrison was arrested in his home at approximately 1:30 a.m. Sunday, February 17, 2013, and charged with second-degree strangulation, second-degree threatening and disorderly conduct for allegedly choking his wife. The following day he posted a $100,000 bond and entered no plea in court, where Judge Kenneth Povodator defined a protective order against him, forbidding contact with his wife and to remain 100 yards away from her. Morrison was next scheduled to appear in court on March 26, 2013.  On July 3, 2013, Morrison pleaded guilty to threatening and breach of peace charges, but still faced a strangulation charge that would be dropped if Morrison completes two family-violence programs.

See also

	 Lists of journalists

	 List of people from Connecticut

	 List of people from Massachusetts

	 List of people from New York City

	 List of television reporters

	 Media in New York City


