
#Article: Rogério Carvalho Santos
#Type: regular article

Rogério Carvalho Santos (born August 2, 1968) is a Brazilian physician and politician current serving as Deputy in Chamber of Deputies of the Brazilian state of Sergipe. He is a former State Surgeon General of Sergipe Department of Health in Brazil. Member of the Workers' Party (PT).

Education

Rogério Carvalho Santos has the title of Ph doctorate from University of Sergipe (UFS) in Aracaju and received his M.D. degree and MBA in Preventive and Social Health Care, a specialization course in Hospital Management from the University of Campinas (Unicamp) at São Paulo.He also worked as a consultant for UNI in Brazil; for the Santa Casa da Misericórdia, and was a researcher for the “Comissão Interinstitucional Nacional de Avaliação de Ensino Médico.”

Political career

Carvalho Santos began his political career in the late 1980s as member of the student activism in the University of Sergipe and then president of the Direção Nacional dos Estudantes de Medicina.In Campinas was the president of the Physician Union and of the Federation of Physicians of São Paulo state.After hi become a member of the Workers' Party (Brazil) (PT). Throughout his career, Carvalho has served as a member of several civic services.

Deputy Mayor for Health

On 2000, Carvalho was nominated by Aracaju Mayor Marcelo Déda to hold the position. During his mandate the city was nominated by the Brazilian Health Minister (Ministério da Saúde (MS).) The Best Lifestyle City of Brazil.Carvalho setup also the emergency services (SAMU - Serviço de Atendimento Móvel de Urgência) of the city.

State Surgeon General

On January, 2006, Carvalho nominated by Governor Marcelo Deda to hold the position of Surgeon General of the State of Sergipe.In this position, Rogério Carvalho Santos serves as a member of the Governor’s Cabinet and as his chief advisor on health policies.He also manages an agency that has more than 60,000 employees. The agency is responsible for 14 state departments,three Foundations and a board staff that provide the population from the state of Sergipe with health, developmental, mental, rehabilitative, social and other critical services.As State Surgeon General, Carvalho is responsible for providing leadership and for overseeing the agency’s efforts to promote the health and well-being of the people from the state of Sergipe, particularly those who are most in need and at risk.

Deputy

In 2010 Mr. Carvalho resign from is charge of State Surgeon General to act as Deputy in Chamber of Deputies of the Brazilian state of Sergipe.

Family

Rogério Carvalho is married with Ivana Feliz also a physician and they have two daughters: Julia and Raquel.He resides in Aracaju.


