
#Article: Rosalind Brewer
#Type: regular article

Rosalind G. Brewer is the President and CEO of Sam's Club, a division of Wal-Mart Stores Inc. She is the first woman and the first African-American to fill the role of CEO at one of Wal-Mart Stores' divisions. As of 2014, she is listed as the 64th most powerful woman in the world by Forbes.

Biography

Brewer, a Detroit native, attended the prestigious Cass Technical High School in Detroit.Brewer completed her undergraduate education at Spelman College, where she earned a bachelor’s degree in chemistry. She is a graduate of the Director’s College at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business/Stanford Law School, and she also attended an advanced management program at The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. 

Brewer is married with two children. 

Career

Prior to joining Walmart, Brewer had a 22-year career at Kimberly-Clark Corporation. Starting out as a scientist, she eventually advanced to president of the Global Nonwovens Sector in 2004.

Brewer’s career with Walmart began in 2006 with her position as regional vice president over operations in Georgia. From there, she became the division president of Walmart’s Southeast market, then president of Walmart East. In 2012, Brewer was named President and CEO of Sam’s Club, becoming the first African American to lead a Walmart division. She has focused on health and wellness by doubling the amount of organic products offered at Sam's Clubs.

Throughout her career, Brewer has amassed experience spanning global manufacturing operations, research and development, marketing and strategic business unit leadership. Her professional interests include building strong teams, inspiring mentoring networks and improving communities.

She serves on the board of directors for Lockheed Martin Corporation, and she is chair of the board of trustees for Spelman. 

Honors

In 2013, Brewer was named one of the World’s 100 Most Powerful Women by Forbes. The magazine also named her among the Most Powerful Black Women of 2013. Additioanally, Working Mother named her one of the Most Powerful Working Moms of 2013. Consistently, she has been honored by Fortune magazine as one of the 50 Most Powerful Women in Business. As of 2014, she is listed as the 64th most powerful woman in the world by Forbes. Fortune's Most Powerful Women List of September 15, 2015 issue ranked Brewer 15th.


