
#Article: Ross Perot, Jr.
#Type: regular article

Henry Ross Perot, Jr. (born November 7, 1958) is a real estate developer and Chairman of the Board for Perot Systems. He is the elder son of Ross Perot.

Early life

Perot was born and raised in Dallas, the son of Margot (Birmingham) and Ross Perot. He graduated from St. Mark's School of Texas in 1977. After graduating from Vanderbilt University, he served in the United States Air Force for eight and a half years.

Career

In 1982 Perot co-piloted a flight that circled the world in a helicopter. Using a Bell 206 L-1 Long Ranger II, Perot completed the circumnavigation on September 30, 1982.

Perot has expanded his family's fortune primarily through real estate and serves as chairman of The Perot Group, which manages the various Perot family interests that include real estate, oil and gas, and financial investments. He is well known for his 1980s development and ownership of the Fort Worth Alliance Airport and the residential community of Heritage, which is a successful development executed by the public-private partnership Alliance Texas. Perot is also Chairman of Hillwood, which he founded in 1988. Hillwood is ranked among the top ten real estate developers in the United States and is recognized for its high-profile projects and public-private ventures.

Hillwood's residential division, Hillwood Communities, was awarded by D Magazine’s D CEO as "Outstanding Single-Family Developer of the Year" in October 2015. The company has focused on acquiring highly sought after land and launching new communities with its LiveSmart platform. The LiveSmart brand entails providing homes and communities with the latest technology in home automation and other conveniences, rigorous standards for energy efficiency and environmental stewardship, and other lifestyle components, such as pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods with amenities that encourage activity and a sense of community. It debuted that brand with Harvest, a $1 billion, 1,150-acre development in Northlake and Argyle. Hillwood Communities recently kicked off several new LiveSmart communities in Texas, including the 1006.5 acres development Pomona in Manvel, TX and the 787-acre Union Park in Little Elm.

From 2002-2003, Perot served as chairman of the Texas Governor's Task Force for Economic Growth.  In March 2007, presidential candidate Mitt Romney, seeking the Republican Party nomination selected Perot as a member of his Texas finance committee.

Perot is also a member of the Board of Directors for Dell Inc. He is Chairman of the United States Air Force Memorial Foundation and Co-Chairman of the EastWest Institute. He also sits on the Board of Trustees of St. Mark's School of Texas, Southern Methodist University, and Vanderbilt University.  In 2010 Forbes reported Perot's net worth at $1.5 Billion. Perot later gained majority ownership of the Dallas Mavericks NBA basketball team. Perot was the 1983 recipient of the Langley Gold Medal from the Smithsonian Institution..


