
#Article: Ronald Osumba
#Type: regular article

Ronald Osumba is a Kenyan who vied for Deputy President in the March 2013 Kenyan Presidential election on a Kenya National Congress ticket. He was the running mate to Peter Kenneth.

Ronald has 10 years of experience in the private sector. He has led successful teams in the areas of business development and thought-leadership, brand management, relationship management and financial management. He has previously worked at Cooperative Bank of Kenya, Impax Business Solutions, and Health Data Systems in senior management roles. He is currently the Senior Manager for Government Relations at Safaricom Limited, a job that allows him to shape policy decisions both at the national and county government levels.

Ronald has a weight of knowledge and experience in leadership as aforementioned in the private sector as well as in national development specifically working with the youth.He has worked with various youth organizations in various capacities most notably Kenya Model United Nations, Youth Agenda, National Youth Convention, Gem Youth Network, and Kenya Youth Sector Alliance.

He is the Chairman of Board in the Youth Entrepreneurship and Sustainability (YES) Kenya and a key member of the Managing Committee Starehe Boys' Centre & School where he also chairs the alumni association, the Old Starehian Society. Here he leads and is respected by a host of industry captains, senior government officials, political and community leaders. These are roles that have given him an opportunity to experience and understand the daunting challenges of the young people in this country.

Ronald has followed his roadmap to become a person deeply engaged in youth development with a sole aim of imputing values into young people that model them into leaders in touch with the 21st century problems. He recently in Kenya’s General Elections 2013 vied for the office of Deputy President alongside Hon. Peter Kenneth and helped re-engineer political campaigning in this country.

His core values are well embedded in a philosophy of focus, perseverance and excellence. His political philosophy is anchored in a belief that strong and accountable leadership does not necessarily emanate from years of sitting in political office but in being able to inspire a majority of the citizens to organize for the purpose of improving their lives. With this diverse experience, Ronald is very well equipped to help drive Kenya’s development agenda to the next level.

Personal life and education

Ronald was born on 18 August 1979 in Kibera to George Samwel Osumba and Joyce Ngesa Osumba. He has 3 siblings namely Harold Ojwang Osumba, Susan Asumo Osumba and Kenneth Olalo Osumba. Ronald started his primary education at the Mpoi Avenue Primary School but sat his Kenya Certificate of Primary Education at Olympic Primary School where he passed with good grades enough to see him off to Starehe Boys' Centre and School. He holds a degree in Business Management from Moi University, a diploma in Biblical Studies and is certified with the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants(ACCA). He is married to Vera Akinyi Osumba with 2 children, Haddasah Waganda Osumba and Eli James Osumba.

Career and community work

Osumba has worked in senior management roles at the Cooperative Bank of Kenya, Impax Business Solutions and Health Data Systems. Prior to his resignation to join politics, he was the senior sales manager for public sector at Safaricom.

Osumba has a hosted Hatua, a TV show on human rights. He is the board chairman of Youth Enterprise and Sustainability Kenya and funding advisor of the United Nations Youth Association of Kenya. He serves as a member of the Starehe Boys Centre management committee and patron of the Gem Youth Network.

Political career

Ronald was named as Peter Kenneth's running mate in the Eagle Alliance after Raphael Tuju stepped down in Mr Kenneth's favour and gave him a free hand to choose a running mate.He has continued to do the political work he started through the Onward brand. Onward is a national movement of young leaders who want to make a positive contribution in nation building through policy and legislative advocacy, community engagement and capacity development mostly through specially designed training programs.


