
#Article: Ronald J. Daniels
#Type: regular article

Ronald Joel Daniels (born 1959) is President of The Johns Hopkins University, a position which he assumed on March 2, 2009. Previously, Daniels was the Vice President and Provost at the University of Pennsylvania, and prior to this was Dean of the Faculty of Law at the University of Toronto. Daniels received his B.A. and J.D. degrees from the University of Toronto, where he was editor-in-chief of the University of Toronto Faculty of Law Review, and his LL.M. degree from Yale Law School.

Leadership at Johns Hopkins University

Since March 1, 2009, Ronald J. Daniels has served as the 14th president of The Johns Hopkins University, a Baltimore, Md.-based global research institution with a fully integrated academic medical center and health system.

Daniels has focused his leadership on three overarching themes - enhanced interdisciplinary collaboration, increased student access, and strengthened community engagement. These themes are the backbone of the Ten by Twenty, the university’s strategic vision through 2020.

Under Daniels’ leadership, the university has launched a series of transformative, cross-disciplinary initiatives that seek to address some of society’s most vexing issues, and created major faculty research awards for multidisciplinary discovery and early-career investigators. Drawing on a $350 million gift from Johns Hopkins alumnus Michael Bloomberg, the university is currently recruiting 50 new Bloomberg Distinguished Professors, whose appointments to two or more divisions create bridges between diverse disciplines.

Daniels’ focus on strengthening the undergraduate experience - part of the Ten by Twenty strategic plan - has encompassed innovations in the gateway science curriculum; the development of a comprehensive online educational strategy that generates $75 million in annual revenue; and a dramatic increase in financial aid, access and selectivity - resulting in a doubling of undergraduate applications from 12,000 in 2009 to nearly 25,000 in 2015.

Daniels has been widely recognized for strengthening Johns Hopkins' ties to Baltimore, with a strategic leveraging of Hopkins’ resources to produce more than $325 million of off-campus private investment in neighborhood revitalization. Contiguous to its health campus, Daniels leads Hopkins' involvement in the $1.8 billion, 88-acre East Baltimore Development Initiative, one of the country's largest mixed-use urban redevelopment projects, including Hopkins’ development and operation of the first new public school in East Baltimore in 20 years, the K-8 Henderson-Hopkins School.

Daniels serves as the chair of the Executive Committee of Johns Hopkins Medicine - the entity linking the Johns Hopkins Health System and the university’s School of Medicine. Daniels has worked closely with health system leadership through several strategic acquisitions and partnerships across health-related industry sectors.

Prior to Johns Hopkins University

Previously, Daniels was provost and professor of law at the University of Pennsylvania and dean and James M. Tory Professor of Law at the University of Toronto. He has advised several Canadian governments on a host of policy issues, including chairing the Ontario Panel of the Future of Government, the Market Design Committee (defining market structure of new competitive electricity markets in Ontario), and the Ontario Government Task Force on Securities Regulation and the Reform of Accounting Standards; he also served on the Toronto Stock Exchange Committee on Corporate Governance in Canada.

Selected works

	A generation at risk: Young investigators and the future of the biomedical workforce, Ronald J. Daniels (Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2015).

	How to Reverse the Graying of Scientific Research, Ronald J. Daniels and Paul Rothman (Wall Street Journal, March 4, 2014).

	 Rule of Law Reform and Development: Charting the Fragile Path of Progress, Michael J. Trebilcock and Ronald J. Daniels (Cheltenham: Elgar Press, 2008).

	 On Risk and Disaster: Lessons from Hurricane Katrina, Ronald J. Daniels, Donald F. Kettl & Howard Kunreuther, eds, (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2005).

	 Rethinking the Welfare State: Government by Voucher, Ronald J. Daniels & Michael J. Trebilcock (London: Routledge, 2005).

	 The Security of Freedom, Ronald J. Daniels, Patrick Macklem & Kent Roach, eds, (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2001).

	 Corporate Decision-Making in Canada (Calgary: University of Calgary Press, 1995).

	 Ontario Hydro at the Millennium (Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press, 1995).

	 "Corporate Governance in Canada" (Fall 1995) Canadian Business Law Journal.

	 "Special Issue on the Corporate Stakeholder Debate: The Classical Theory and its Critics" (1993) 43(3) University of Toronto Law Journal.

	 Cases and Materials on Partnerships and Canadian Business Corporations, Third Edition, J.S. Ziegel, Ronald J. Daniels, J. G. MacIntosh & D. Johnston (Toronto: Carswell & Company, 1994).


