
#Article: George N. Gillett, Jr.
#Type: regular article

George Nield Gillett, Jr. (born 22 October 1938) is an American businessman. Originally from Wisconsin, he lives in Vail, Colorado. He is married and has four children.

Biography

George Gillett graduated from Lake Forest Academy in 1956. He attended Amherst College and is a 1961 graduate of Dominican College of Racine, Wisconsin. Gillett's first job following college was with Crown Zellerbach as regional sales manager. Gillett's career continued in the 1960s in marketing and management consulting, initially with McKinsey & Co. A sports fanatic since childhood, by 1966, he was business manager and partner of the Miami Dolphins. In 1966, he purchased a 20% interest in the Miami Dolphins NFL franchise for $1 million. He sold this interest in 1968 for $3 million, and used some of the proceeds to purchase the nearly defunct Harlem Globetrotters and later started Globetrotters Communications, a nationally syndicated radio group. He reinvigorated the Globetrotters by an intense marketing effort that included a popular cartoon series. In 1978, Gillett bought Packerland. With the successful venture of Packerland, Gillett then diversified into radio and television with the start of Gillett Communications Company. At its peak, Gillett Communications owned network affiliates, the majority of which were CBS, in many of the country's major television markets.

In 1979, he launched Gillett Communications by buying three small television stations. Three years later he bought the WSM television station in Nashville. In 1984, Gillett acquired Appleton-based Post Corporation's eight television stations, 22 newspapers and associated plants; the non-broadcast assets were sold to Thomson Corporation and other buyers. In 1987 he acquired Storer Broadcasting using Kohlberg Kravis Roberts junk bonds, after the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) lifted restrictions on ownership.

In 1985, Gillett acquired Vail Associates' Vail and Beaver Creek ski resorts. George would often ride chairlifts and greet guests, and launched a massive installation of high-speed detachable chairlifts. Gillett also supported major alpine ski events at a time when most ski areas in America declined to host international races, starting with the 1989 World Alpine Ski Championships, and through his support hosted the 1999 World Alpine Ski Championships.

Gillett's companies sought Chapter 11 protection in 1992, as higher interest rates penalised junk bond issuers. Gillett's media arm was reorganized as SCI Television, shortly before being purchased by New World Communications under the control of Ronald Perelman. Many of these stations would eventually be sold to News Corporation and change their affiliation to Fox.

After junk bonds

Gillett walked away with $32.1 million to restart his business empire when Vail floated on the NYSE. In 1995, he repurchased Packerland undertaken by Booth Creek Management Corp., a company created to oversee the acquisitions and management of interests of the Gillett family from that point forwards, and of which Gillett remains Chairman.

In 1996, he formed Booth Creek Ski Holdings Inc., acquiring or building a range of ski resorts in New Hampshire, California, Washington and Wyoming. He later bought Grand Targhee Ski and Summer Resort, together with several golf courses.

From 1997, he extended his meat interests by building Corporate Brand Foods America (which included ITC, Iowa Ham, Jordan Meats and Wright Bacon). Iowa Beef Processors (IBP) purchased the company for US$550 million in 1999.

Gillett and Hicks, Muse, Tate & Furst then bought ConAgra's beef operations - Swift & Company - for US$1.4 billion in 2000.  On 12 July 2007, JBS S.A., the largest beef processor in South America and one of the largest worldwide beef exporters, purchased Swift & Company in a US$1.5 billion all-cash deal. The acquisition made the newly consolidated JBS Swift Group the largest beef processor in the world.

In the meat business, Gillett now also formerly controlled:

	Petaluma Poultry - natural and organic chicken products

	Snowball Foods - food processor of turkey and chicken products

	Kings Delight - food processor of turkey and chicken products

	B3R Country Meats - processes fresh and frozen natural beef

	Coleman Natural Products - processes fresh and frozen natural pork products and lamb

	Gerhard’s Napa Valley Sausage - a producer of gourmet sausage products made primarily from poultry.

North American sports interests

In 2000, Gillett joined forces with Pat Bowlen and John Elway in a failed attempt to buy the Denver Nuggets of the NBA, Colorado Avalanche of the NHL, and Pepsi Center. On 2 January 2001, Gillett bought an 80% interest in the Montreal Canadiens and their home arena, Molson Centre, for US$185 million.  Prior to the purchase, Gillett had shown interest in the Florida Panthers, New York Islanders, Ottawa Senators, and the Phoenix Coyotes. Gillett's bid initially raised fears that he might move the NHL's oldest franchise to the United States. However, after no other viable offers surfaced from Canadian interests, Molson agreed to Gillett's offer. Molson, however, maintained the right of first refusal should Gillett ever sell the team.

On 6 August 2007, Gillett bought a controlling interest of the NASCAR team Evernham Motorsports from founder Ray Evernham, thereby forming Gillett Evernham Motorsports. In January 2009, a merger was completed with fellow NASCAR team Petty Enterprises. As a result, GEM was renamed Richard Petty Motorsports. Gillett no longer has a share in the team.

On 27 March 2008, Joey Saputo, chairman of USL First Division team Montreal Impact, confirmed talks with Gillett and Major League Soccer for a Montreal franchise. While a bid for a franchise was launched with Saputo and Gillett co-heading the venture, as a result of finances, however, the team would rescind the bid later that year on 22 November.

On 20 June 2009, the Montreal Canadiens confirmed that Gillett had sold the "Habs", the Bell Centre and the Gillett Entertainment Group, a Canadian-based sports and entertainment promoter, to the Molson brothers for a reported $550 million (Cdn). The deal was concluded on December 1, 2009.

Liverpool F.C.

Since October 2006, Gillett with fellow American Tom Hicks had been parties interested in a proposed takeover of Liverpool F.C. of the Premier League. In January 2007, Reports stated that Gillett had made another bid for Liverpool. On 31 January 2007, Dubai International Capital announced they had pulled out of the deal, giving Gillett the opportunity to buy the club from David Moores. On 2 February 2007, Gillett and Tom Hicks reached a deal with the club's board, which was sealed on February 6, thought to be worth in the region of £435 million: £220 million to buy out existing shareholders (including approximately £44.8 million of debt), and £215 million for the new stadium proposed at nearby Stanley Park. The Board unanimously recommended that the club's shareholders accept this offer.

On 22 January 2008, a majority of Liverpool fans, at the game between Liverpool and Aston Villa, protested against Gillett and Hicks' running of the club, urging the pair to sell their shares in Liverpool F.C. to Dubai International Capital (DIC). Neither owner, nor their representative Foster Gillett were present at the game. Gillett was reportedly been targeted by DIC to sell his shares. It was reported that he has fallen out with Tom Hicks and in recent months has kept silent over his dealing with the club. On March 7, 2008, it was reported that Gillett had agreed to sell 98 per cent of his Liverpool stock to DIC, but Hicks blocked the sale. In an interview on Prime Time Sports in Canada, Gillett revealed that he and his family had received death threats from angry Liverpool fans: "The fans don’t want him Hicks to have even one share of my stake in the club, based on what they are sending to me. As a result of that we family have received many phone calls in the middle of the night threatening our lives, death threats. A number came to the office and my son, Foster, and daughter-in-law, Lauren, have received them." The relationship between Gillett and Hicks broke down some time ago, leading to in-fighting Anfield.

It has been reported that former manager Rafael Benítez's relationship with Hicks and Gillett had become increasingly strained and he was fired on 2 June 2010, after a poor season which saw the club finish seventh in the Premier League, missing out on UEFA Champions League football for the following season.

As of 15 October 2010, Gillett had lost ownership of Liverpool F.C., and despite numerous attempts to prevent it, the club was sold to New England Sports Ventures (NESV), for a fee believed to be around £300M which was far below his valuation of "between £600M and £1 billion(B)", by the Liverpool F.C. board of directors in a 3-2 vote.

As of November 2010, Gillett was personally named in a lawsuit filed by Mill Financial, seeking $117 million. Mill Financial, based in Springfield, Virginia, reportedly refinanced a loan used by Gillett to buy a big stake in Liverpool F.C. in 2007. Gillett’s partner in the deal was Tom Hicks. Gillett and Hicks, dba Gillett Football LLC, lost control of Liverpool F.C. after they were unable to stop the Royal Bank of Scotland, which financed their original purchase of the team, from selling Liverpool F.C. The bank sold Liverpool F.C. to Boston Red Sox owner John W. Henry’s New England Sports Ventures at a price that was lower than expected. At the same time the Liverpool issue was occurring, Gillett’s Richard Petty Motorsports fell into financial trouble.

On 11 January 2013, Hicks and Gillett finally decided to drop their case in the English Law Courts against Sir Martin Broughton, Christian Purslow and Ian Ayre, the three directors on the board of Liverpool F.C. at the time of the sale of the club to NESV. They also agreed to drop their case against NESV and RBS Bank. The terms of the agreement are confidential, though it is believed that no monies were paid to Hicks or Gillett. Earlier in the week, Hicks and Gillett had lost a Court of Appeal bid to delay a High Court Trial, so they could have more time to raise the monies needed to fund the multi million pound lawsuit.

Other interests

Other former Gillett business interests include:

	Northland Services Inc. - a marine transportation company

	Great Northern Bark and Sierra Organics - landscaping and gardening products company

Gillett's other current business interests include:

	Summit Automotive Partners, an auto dealership group


