
#Article: Salman Bin Ibrahim Al-Khalifa
#Type: regular article

Salman Bin Ebrahim Al Khalifa (سلمان بن ابراهيم آل خليفة in Arabic, born 2 November 1965 in Riffa, Bahrain) is the President of the Asian Football Confederation since 2 May 2013. Before his election as the president of AFC, he was president of Bahrain Football Association and also Chairman of the Asian Football Confederation Disciplinary Committee, and Deputy Chairman of the FIFA Disciplinary Committee.

Biography

Shaikh Salman Bin Ebrahim Al Khalifa is a member of the Bahrain Royal Family. He graduated from University of Bahrain in 1992 with a bachelor's degree in English Literature and History. Shaikh Salman has been involved in football for many years dating back to the 1980s when he played in the youth team of Bahrain Division I team, Riffa Club.

Since leaving Riffa Club to focus on his academic studies, Shaikh Salman has held executive positions at the BFA. In 1996, he was appointed Chairman of the National Team, elected Vice President two years later and eventually became the Football Association’s president in 2002. He has also served as the Co-Chairman of the Disciplinary Committee at several FIFA Tournaments such as, the FIFA World Cups, FIFA Beach Tournaments, FIFA Club Championships, etc. He was also Deputy Chairman of the FIFA Disciplinary Committee at Beijing in 2008.

Sheikh Salman was president of the Bahrain Football Association at time of the "golden era" of Bahraini football. The national team was a match away from qualifying to the 2006 FIFA World Cup and 2010 FIFA World Cup. The team also managed to reach the 2004 Asian Cup Semi Final, the furthest the national team has ever reached in the continental championship. The national team FIFA ranking also reached its highest in the history of Bahraini Football, as it moved up to the 44th position. 

On 15 October 2015, Sheikh Salman announced his candidature to become the next president of FIFA after the election of February 2016. His likely candidature aroused criticism from human rights organizations, notably Human Rights Watch, Americans for Democracy and Human Rights in Bahrain and the Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy. He was accused of “complicity in crimes against humanity” for allegedly heading a committee that identified 150 athletes, including international footballers, involved in pro-democracy demonstrations in 2011, many of whom were later imprisoned and tortured. He denied the alleglations.

Shaikh Salman has three children, two daughters Sheikha Latifa born in 1994 and Sheikha Aysha born in 1998, and a son Sheikh Isa born in 2001.


