
#Article: Samuel Hamilton Walker
#Type: regular article

Samuel Hamilton Walker (February 24, 1817 - October 9, 1847) was a Texas Ranger captain and military officer of the Republic of Texas and the United States armies. Walker served in several armed conflicts, including the American Indian Wars and the Mexican-American wars.

Biography

Walker was born on February 24, 1817 at Toaping Castle in Maryland to Nathan and Elizabeth (Thomas) Walker and was the fifth of seven children.

Military

Walker arrived in Texas in 1842, when he took part in the defense against the Mexican invasion led by General Adrian Woll. He then joined the Texas Rangers in 1844 under the command of Captain John Coffee Hays. Promoted to the rank of captain, he later led a Ranger company in the Mexican-American War with General Zachary Taylor and General Winfield Scott's armies.

Walker was involved in, and was a survivor of, the Black Bean Episode.

Walker Colt

Walker is best known as the co-inventor of the famous Walker Colt revolver, along with arms manufacturer Samuel Colt. Walker is said to have self-funded a trip to New York to meet with Colt and proposed to him the concept of a weapon based on the then-popular five-shot Colt Paterson revolver, with many enhancements such as adding a sixth round. By 1847, the new revolver was produced. The United States Mounted Rifle companies were provided with the new weapons, which proved to be extremely effective. 

Death

On October 9, 1847, Walker was killed in Huamantla, in Tlaxcala, while leading his troops in the Battle of Huamantla during the Mexican-American War.He was struck down by a shotgun (escopette, variously escopeta) round fired from a balcony, although popular legend often has claimed the weapon was a lance.

In 1848 his remains were moved to San Antonio. On April 21, 1856, as part of a battle of San Jacinto celebration, he was reburied in the Odd Fellows' Cemetery in San Antonio.

Walker County, Texas was renamed for him after the original namesake, Robert J. Walker, sided with the Union during the Civil War.

See also

	History of the Texas Ranger Division


