
#Article: Saswata Chatterjee
#Type: regular article

Saswata Chatterjee (শাশ্বত চ্যাটার্জী; also known as Apu) is an Indian actor of television and films based in Kolkata. Born to actor Subhendu Chatterjee, Saswata Chatterjee began his career with a Hindi serial directed by Saibal Mitra, based on Samaresh Majumdar's Kaalpurush. He gained popularity by portraying the character of Topshe in a Feluda-based television series directed by Sandip Ray. His acting in many Bengali films has been praised by the critics, including his portrayal of a Ritwik Ghatak-inspired character in the 2013 film Meghe Dhaka Tara. He enjoyed success at the national level in Sujoy Ghosh's 2012 blockbuster Hindi film, Kahaani, where he played an assassin.

Personal life

Saswata Chatterjee was born on 19 December 1970 to Subhendu Chatterjee, a noted Bengali actor. Saswata Chatterjee lives in Kolkata and is married to Mohua, a teacher, the actor has one daughter.

Career

Chatterjee started his career with a Hindi serial directed by Saibal Mitra, based on Samaresh Majumdar’s Kaalpurush. Later, he acted on a television series directed by Sandip Ray, where he portrayed the character of Topshe, a sidekick of Feluda, the sleuth. After this television debut, his acting skills were appreciated and he gained popularity.

Chatterjees acting in several Bengali films were critically appreciated. Some of his notable appearances include Tiyasha, C/O Sir, Proloy (2013), Jekhane Bhuter Bhoy, Meghe Dhaka Tara, Bhooter Bhabishyat, Abar Bomkesh (Chitrachor), Rang Milanti, Byomkesh Bakshi (Adim Ripu), The Bong Connection, Abar Aranye. He worked in the blockbuster Hindi film, Kahaani (2012) directed by Sujoy Ghosh and starring Vidya Balan. In that film, he played the role of a cold-blooded killer named Bob Biswas. His role as Bob became so popular that Chatterjee describes it as

 Bob Biswas has most definitely exceeded the popularity of Kahaani. Poor Saswata has lost his identity. He is addressed as Bob wherever he goes. Saswata Chaterjee on his role on Bob Biswas. 

The character went viral on Facebook and Twitter with thousands of followers. A graphic novel is in the making was also inspired from Bobs character.

Meghe Dhaka Tara was released in 2013, a film inspired by the life and works of Bengali film director Ritwik Ghatak and also depicts the socio-political environment of contemporary West Bengal during the Tebhaga and Naxalite movements. In this movie, he played the lead character as Nilkantha Bagchi.

Filmography

Awards

	 2014 : Zee Bangla Gaurav Samman for Bhooter Bhabishyat

	 2011 : Imphal International Short Film Festival 2012 - Best Supporting Actor for THE FORLORN


