
#Article: Scott Howell
#Type: regular article

Herbert Weston Scott Howell III is an American conservative political consultant, whose recent clients include Meg Whitman and Rudy Giuliani.

Personal

Married in 1994, he and his wife Julie reside in the Dallas-Fort Worth area and have two children.

Career

In a 2006 interview, Howell discussed his early career in some detail. Recruited by Lee Atwater to work for the RNC after his 1988 work for presidential candidate Bob Dole, Howell spent four years as a campaign operative before moving to Texas in 1992 to work for Karl Rove, then running a direct-mail firm. In 1993, Howell started his own political consulting firm, which has since grown into Scott Howell and Company.

He has run successful United States Senate campaigns for Republicans such as: 

	Jerry Moran of Kansas who defeated fellow Congressman Todd Tiahrt in a hotly contested primary in 2010

	John Thune of South Dakota, who defeated incumbent Senator Minority Leader Tom Daschle

	Tom Coburn of Oklahoma, who defeated Brad Carson

	Bob Corker of Tennessee, who defeated Harold Ford, Jr.

	Jim DeMint of South Carolina

	Lindsey Graham of South Carolina

	Saxby Chambliss of Georgia

	Jim Talent of Missouri 

	Norm Coleman of Minnesota in 2002

Failed clients have included:

	George Allen, a United States Senator defeated in 2006 by Jim Webb

	Jerry Kilgore, defeated in 2005 by Tim Kaine in Virginia governor's race

	Rudy Giuliani who withdrew from the 2008 presidential primary season.

	Norm Coleman of Minnesota in 2008

Recent or current clients (2010) include:

	 Meg Whitman, gubernatorial candidate in California; Jerry Moran, candidate for US Senate in Kansas; Linda McMahon, candidate for US Senate in Connecticut. US Senator Jim DeMint; US Senator John Thune.

Notable campaigns

2002 Georgia Senate Race

In 2002, Howell's client Saxby Chambliss defeated incumbent Senator Max Cleland. Supporters of Cleland blamed a Chambliss TV ad featuring the likenesses of Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein, while criticizing Cleland's votes against homeland security measures. The ad, which Cleland supporters claimed questioned the senator's patriotism, was removed after protests from prominent politicians including Republicans like John McCain and Chuck Hagel.  Chambliss supporters claimed the ad didn't question Cleland's patriotism, but rather his judgment. Although these ads are frequently mentioned as examples of work by Scott Howell, Howell has repeatedly denied that he produced this particular ad.

2006 Tennessee Senate Race

In October 2006, Howell was revealed as the producer, with Terry Nelson, of the "Harold, Call Me" attack ad used against democratic Tennessee Senatorial candidate Rep. Harold Ford Jr. in which a white woman said that she had met Ford at a Playboy party. The ad concludes with the woman speaking to the camera and saying to Ford "Call me."

Coverage of the controversy characterized Howell as a "protégé" of Karl Rove.


