
#Article: Sean O'Reilly
#Type: regular article

Sean O’Reilly is the owner and operator of Arcana Studio, Canada's largest comic book company.

Through his abilities as a developer of transmedia properties O'Reilly has led Arcana Studio to winning The Joe Shuster Award for Outstanding Publisher in their first year, as voted by the retailers and readers. As well, Arcana Studio was nominated for a Harvey Award in its first year, a feat unheard of in the quarter century tenure of the award. O’Reilly is also one of the most prolific independent comic book writers in Canada and his creations, Kade and Ezra, have been seen in over 250,000 comics and books and published in eleven countries and seven different languages.

O’Reilly resides in Coquitlam, British Columbia, has completed two degrees and his Masters and teaches college level courses both in Vancouver and through UCLA in addition to being a Mentor and Scriptwriting consultant for Telefilm in 2008 he won the Top 40 Under 40 Award in Vancouver and won a Moonbeam Award as well as the Graphic Novel of the Year for The Clockwork Girl.

Notable graphic novels include Kade, which has gone on to be one of Arcana's top selling books. The first series, Original Sun, came out in 2005, followed by Sun of Perdition in 2007, Shiva's Sun (2008), Rising Sun (2009), Red Sun (2010) and Prodigal Sun (2011). Kade has now been published in numerous countries including Italy, Germany, France, Spain, Croatia and Poland. An animated series is being developed based on the upcoming graphic novel Children of the Black Sun. In 2007, O'Reilly wrote The Clockwork Girl with co-creator Kevin Hanna and the steampunk fairytale is now on its way to becoming a feature film. O'Reilly is producing and comic co-creator Kevin Hanna is directing. The film stars Alexa Vega of Spy Kids and Repo! The Genetic Opera as the lead character Tesla, as well as Carrie-Anne Moss, Brad Garrett, and Jeffery Tambor. The film is due to finish in summer 2011 and looks for release end of 2011. In 2008, Sean created and wrote The Gwaii after being inspired by the Queen Charlotte Islands. The book went on to win the gold medal in the Moonbeam Awards and is being developed as a short film directed by Sean O'Reilly. In 2010, Sean wrote a six book series called Mighty Mighty Monsters through Capstone Publishers. The series went on to commercial and critical success and another 10 books are scheduled to come out in 2011 and 2012.

Sean signed a two book deal with HarperCollins based on The Clockwork Girl and his new series, Pixies. Pixies is created and written by Sean and is already under development to be Luximation's next feature film after The Clockwork Girl.

Comic book credits

	 Kade - creator/writer/concept art

	 Ezra - creator/writer/concept art

	 Clockwork Girl - co-creator/writer

	 The Gwaii - creator/writer/concept art

	 Torment - creator/co-writer/editor

	 Starkweather - editor

	 Paradox - editor

	 Criss Cross - editor

	 The Assassin - editor

	 El Arsenal - editor

	 Dragon's Lair - editor

	 Sundown - editor

	 Final Destination - editor

	 Se7en - writer/editor

	 Kiss Kompendium editor (through Harper Collins)

TV credits

	 HBO's Entourage Season 2 Episode 9 - set design and Angel Quest concept art

	 NBC's Psych Season 1 Episode 8 - set design and Green Spirit concept art

	 SpikeTV's Red Lotus (producer, concept development and animation)

Video Game credits

	 Disney Interactive's Turok (concept development and comic books)

	 Capcom's Rockemen (writing and development)

Movie credits

	 A Dangerous Man (Paramount Pictures), producer

	 Paradox, starring Kevin Sorbo

	 Circle of Pain (Lions Gate Entertainment), producing and writing

	 Beatdown (Lions Gate Entertainment), producing and writing

	 Dancing Ninja, Animation

	 Clockwork Girl, producing

Selected Awards

	 Business in Vancouver's Top 40 Under 40 (2008)

	 Author and co-creator of The Clockwork Girl, winner of the Moonbeam Award for Top Children's Graphic Novel (2008)

	 Foreword Magazine's recognition as Top Graphic Novel for The Clockwork Girl (2008), presented at Book Expo America

	 Author of The Gwaii, winner of the Moonbeam Award for Top Children's Graphic Novel (2009)


