
#Article: Seymour Schulich
#Type: regular article

Seymour Schulich, OC (born January 6, 1940) is a Canadian businessman, investor, author and philanthropist.

Biography

Schulich graduated from McGill University with a BSc in 1961 and an MBA from the Desautels Faculty of Management in 1965. He earned the Chartered Financial Analyst designation from the University of Virginia in 1969.

He is married to Tanna and they live in Willowdale, Ontario. They have 2 daughters and are grandparents of 4.

Career

His first job was at Shell Oil Company. From 1968 to 1990, he worked at Beutel, Goodman & Company Ltd., a pension fund management company which manages in excess of $10.6 billion CAD (as of 2003), becoming president and vice-chairman.

In 1978, Schulich, along with partner Pierre Lassonde, helped pioneer the concept of royalty payments in the mining industry: their Franco-Nevada and Euro-Nevada companies discovered some precious minerals, but their royalty arrangements allowed them to gain ownership stakes in some of the world’s most profitable mines. A $1,000 investment in Franco-Nevada's stock in 1983 was worth $1.2 million in 2002, equivalent to a 40% average annual rate of return. In 2002, Franco-Nevada merged with Normandy Mining Limited of Australia and Newmont Mining Corporation, creating the largest gold mining company in the world, Newmont Mining Corporation. Schulich was Director of Newmont Mining and Chairman of its merchant banking division from 2002-2007.

In 2007, Schulich published a book titled Get Smarter: Life and Business Lessons.

Philanthropy

Schulich is well known for his philanthropic activities, having donated funds to numerous Canadian universities including York (Schulich School of Business), Western Ontario (Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry), Calgary (Schulich School of Engineering), Dalhousie (Schulich School of Law), McGill (Schulich School of Music), and Nipissing (Schulich School of Education). The first and largest donation that was made was to the Schulich School of Business at York University. All degrees issued by the Schulich School of Business now bear the signature of Seymour Schulich. His philanthropy also extends beyond universities, to the Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre (Schulich Heart Centre) in Toronto, and outside Canada to the University of Nevada, Reno (Schulich Lecture Hall) and Technion - Israel Institute of Technology.

Some of Schulich's gifts have been met with controversy from the student bodies of the recipient institutions. His $25 million endowment to the Faculty of Medicine & Dentistry at the University of Western Ontario was protested by a few of the School of Medicine's undergraduate students for both the source of the funds and the manner in which the faculty administration finalized the deal. Some students contended that unethical practices by some of Schulich's companies, such as Newmont Mining, made the conditions attached to the gift unacceptable. However, during this time, he did give generously to McGill's Library of Science and Engineering which was renamed the Schulich Library of Science and Engineering in honour of his family in 2001. He was finally able to endow the Schulich School of Music under the principalship of Heather Munroe-Blum in 2005.

On October 15, 2009, Schulich officially presented a donation in the amount of $20 million to Dalhousie University's Law School; in doing so, the Law School has now been renamed the Schulich School of Law.

On October 14, 2011, Schulich announced a $100 million scholarship program targeting students entering the science, technology, engineering and math fields (STEM) in Canada and Israel. This gift is being co-administered by UJA Federation of Greater Toronto and the Schulich Foundation. The program is called Schulich Leader Scholarships, the largest undergraduate STEM scholarship opportunity in each country.

Honours

	 2013, Doctor of Laws, honoris causa, Dalhousie University

	 2011, Officer of the Order of Canada "for his transformational philanthropy in support of our education and health care institutions".

	2011, Inductee, Canadian Business Hall of Fame

	 2010, Doctor of Laws, honoris causa, University of Calgary

	 2008, Doctor of Laws, honoris causa, University of Western Ontario

	 2006, Inductee, Canadian Mining Hall of Fame

	 2004, Honorary Doctorate, McGill University

	 2003, Doctor of Laws, honoris causa, York University

	 1999, Member of the Order of Canada

	 1998, "Developer of the Year" by the Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada

	 1997, with Pierre Lassonde, named "Mining Man of the Year" by The Northern Miner

Partial bibliography


