
#Article: Shawn Lathrop
#Type: regular article

Shawn Lathrop (born July 8, 1973 in Sunnyvale, California) is an American actor living in Hawaii.

Early life and career

His first theater experience was in the large scale production of the nativity for the Medford, Oregon First Nazarene Church at age 7. The acting bug bit him and he appeared in every school performance he could. He competed twice in school talent contests playing airband with friends in fifth and sixth grade. "Nobody could play an airguitar like I could, man!" he was quoted saying.

Lathrop attended Phoenix High School in nearby Phoenix, Oregon. In high school, his attention was more focused on working, dating and being a class clown. Pressure from friends kept him from auditioning for plays as it was seen as "uncool" by his peers. In his senior year, he and a friend approached the teacher in charge of the theater program and convinced him to allow them to build sets and perform technical work on productions to satisfy their need for an elective credit to graduate. Shawn and his friend Jack Mills built sets and props for several plays that year and worked the stage lights for several productions.he Served as a private in the Army until an injury during basic training forced him to leave and worked as an exotic dancer.

In college, Shawn was able to return to his love of performing when he landed the role of the Sherriff in the play "The Crucible" for Hawaii Pacific University directed by Joyce Maltby and Holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in Counseling Psychology. Unfortunately, illness and slipping grades forced him to drop out only a week before opening night leaving his understudy to take over the role. He focused on honing his craft for the next 4 years by taking workshops by Hawaii-based casting director Margaret Doversola who would become a dear friend of his over the span of ten years. Shawn also took acting classes from the likes of Wayne Ward in Honolulu and Joyce Maltby through her Advanced Scene Study class at HPU. For his final grade in that class, Shawn performed as three different characters in scenes from Arthur Miller plays "A View From the Bridge" and "Death of a Salesman" to rave reviews by those in attendance. Shawn had the foresight to invite several local casting directors and talent agents to the show which led to him meeting his first acting agent, Ruth Woodhall.

Recent work

From 2003 to 2007 while employed as a Behavioral Specialist with the Hawaii Department of Education at Kailua High School in Kailua, HI, Shawn volunteered his time as an advisor and acting coach to the Kailua High School Drama Club and assisted in producing and directing three plays as well as coaching students in the use of improv and method acting for the stage.

He is currently a member of the Screen Actors Guild.

His credits include:

Films:

2007 - Alvarado - Aztec Rex (Tyrannosaurus Azteca, Sci Fi Channel movie by Brian Trenchard-Smith)Tyrannosaurus Azteca http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0925306/

2007 - John - The Lunch (University of Hawaii Academy for Creative Media student film by Mikaela Bruce)

2006 - Mr. Vega's Brother - Breaking Rules (Showdown in Chinatown film competition honorable mention by Robert Campbell)

2006 - George - 4:20 (Independent film by Cade & Jason Santos)

2006 - SSG Paulsen - Safe House (Internet industrial film by Future Combat Systems)

Television:

	 2007 - Rescue Officer - Flight 29 Down: The Hotel Tango http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0948118/

	 2007 - Federal Agent - Lost Season 3 episode 15 "Left Behind"http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0979596/

	 2007 - TV Show Director - Lost Season 3 episode 14 "Expose"

	 2006 - British Pub Patron - Lost Season 3 episode 8 "Flashes Before Your Eyes"

	 2006 - British Soldier - Lost Season 2 Episode 23 (season finale) "Live Together, Die Alone"

	 2006 - Yuppie Bar Patron - Lost Season 2 Episode 17 "Lockdown"

	 2005 - Movie Theater Employee - Lost Season 2 Episode 3 "Orientation"

	 2010 - Flight attendant - Lost Season 6 Episode 1 "LA X"


