
#Article: Andrea Leadsom
#Type: regular article

Andrea Jacqueline Leadsom (born 13 May 1963) is the Conservative Member of Parliament for South Northamptonshire. She has served as Minister of State for Energy at the Department of Energy and Climate Change since 11 May 2015, having previously held the post of Economic Secretary to the Treasury from April 2014.

Early life

Leadsom was born in Aylesbury and attended Tonbridge Girls' Grammar School before reading Political Science at the University of Warwick.

Career before Parliament

Leadsom worked in the financial sector for BZW, Barclays Bank - where she was Financial Institutions Director from 1993 to 1997 - and was Managing Director of De Putron Fund Management (DPFM) between 1997 and 1999. She was Senior Investment Officer at Invesco Perpetual from 1999 to 2009.

Political career

Prior to becoming an MP, Leadsom was a Councillor on South Oxfordshire District Council between 2003 and 2007. She contested Knowsley South constituency in the 2005 general election and was a member of the Conservative A-List. She was chosen to stand as the candidate in the newly created South Northamptonshire constituency in June 2006 and was elected at the 2010 general election with a majority of more than 20,000.

After entering the House of Commons, she was appointed a member of the Treasury Select Committee.

In July 2012, during the Libor scandal, she was widely reported on for her effectiveness at getting to the bottom of the scale of the mismanagement of risk in banks during the Treasury Committee's questioning of Bob Diamond. At a subsequent hearing with the Bank of England she also questioned Paul Tucker who confirmed that the previous government had not conspired with the Bank to fix rates. In a BBC Interview, Leadsom stated that the suggestion "has now been completely squashed by Paul Tucker", and that on that specific point, George Osborne, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, might want to apologise to Ed Balls for "suggesting he was implicated in rate fixing", although she also pointed out that Balls "still has a huge amount to answer for in relation to the scandal and his time in office".

Leadsom was one of 5 MPs to abstain from the Government's Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Bill by voting in both lobbies Leadsom had earlier said she found the wording of the legislation “unacceptable”, and that voting no reflect the views of “so many” of her constituents, who felt that the bill was “deeply wrong”, but ultimately chose to abstain, saying "I find myself genuinely torn... I cannot vote against a measure that would mean so much to the minority of homosexual couples for whom marriage is the ultimate recognition for their genuine feelings for each other. Yet nor can I vote for a measure that risks centuries of faith based belief in marriage."

Leadsom was a founder and leader of the Fresh Start Project seeking reform of the UK's relationship with the European Union.

Leadsom was re-elected as MP for South Northamptnshire on 7 May 2015 with 36,607 votes, compared to her nearest rival Lucy Mills (Labour), with 10,191 votes. On the 11th May 2015, Leadsom was moved from Economic Secretary to the Treasury, to Minister of State at the Department of Energy and Climate Change.

Economic Secretary to the Treasury

On 9 April 2014 Leadsom was appointed Economic Secretary to the Treasury in the mini-reshuffle caused by Maria Miller's resignation from the Cabinet.

Following her appointment, it was discovered that she had placed her shares in a buy-to-let property company, which she had started with her husband in 2003, into trusts for the benefit of her children. This is a move that is commonly used to avoid inheritance tax. She also took advantage of offshore banking arrangements for the property company in an apparent contradiction to George Osborne’s attempts to crack down on tax avoidance. A spokesperson for Leadsom said: “This is a normal corporate situation and all tax that is due is being paid. None of the loans for the properties are based offshore”.

There was further criticism when it was revealed that she had received a series of donations totalling £70,000 from a firm based in London but owned by her Guernsey-based brother-in-law, Peter de Putron, via a holding company in the British Virgin Islands tax haven. Leadsom’s husband Ben is a director of the firm which made the donations, which were used to pay the salaries of staff in Leadsom’s Westminster office after her election as MP; the firm has also made donations of £816,000 to the Conservative party. Because the firm making the donations, Gloucester Research (later becoming GR Software and Research) was based in London the donations conformed to the rule banning political donations from abroad. The Labour MP Tom Watson said: “These very large donations might be within the rules, but it certainly isn’t right that a Treasury minister has been taking money in this way. Most reasonable people will see this as completely unreasonable”.

As the government minister responsible for financial services she oversees the regulation of hedge funds, including London-based DP Management which is owned by her benefactor Mr de Putron, who is married to her sister.

Minister of State at DECC

Appointed as Minister of State at the Department for Energy and Climate Change 11 May 2015  despite her previous opposition to Wind farms and European Renewable energy targets

Constituency

Leadsom is a founding trustee of NORPIP, the Northamptonshire Parent Infant Partnership, a charity to help parents bond with their babies.In 2009 she launched the Towcester job club, followed in 2011 by a job club in Brackley.

Personal life

She married Ben Leadsom in 1993 and has two sons and one daughter.


