
#Article: Soumitra Dutta
#Type: regular article

Soumitra Dutta (born 27 August 1963) is an author, academic, businessman, and, as of July 1, 2012, Dean of the Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of Management at Cornell University. Before his appointment to Cornell University, Dutta was the Roland Berger Chaired Professor of Business and Technology and Professor of Business and Technology at INSEAD.

Biography

He was born in Chandigarh in 1963.

Soumitra Dutta became the eleventh dean of the Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of Management at Cornell University. He previously served as the Roland Berger Chaired Professor of Business and Technology and founder and academic director of the eLab at INSEAD, a top-ranked graduate business school in Fontainebleau, France.

Previous roles Dutta has held during his 22-year tenure at INSEAD include dean of external relations; dean of executive education; and dean of technology and e-learning. He has served as a visiting professor in the Haas School of Business at Berkeley, Oxford Internet Institute at University of Oxford, and Judge School at University of Cambridge in England. He has lived and worked in the U.S., Europe, and Asia, including stints as an engineer with GE in the U.S. and Schlumberger in Japan.

Dutta is an authority on the impact of new technology on the business world, especially social media and social networking, and on strategies for driving growth and innovation by embracing the digital economy. He is the co-editor and author respectively of two influential reports in technology and innovation the Global Information Technology Report (co-published with the World Economic Forum) and the Global Innovation Index (to be co-published with the World Intellectual Property Organization). Both reports have been used by several governments around the world in assessing and planning their technology and innovation policies.

Dutta's work has been widely published in the Harvard Business Review, European Management Journal, Management Science, IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, Decision Support Systems, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, and other journals. Dutta and his ideas have been featured in myriad business magazines, newspapers, and blogs, including Global Intelligence for the CIO, Information Week, Brasil, BusinessWorld India, Chief Executive, Finance & Management, Chief Executive Magazine, Forbes, and The McKinsey Quarterly.

Dutta is a member of the Davos Circle, an association of long-time participants in the Annual Davos meeting of the World Economic Forum and has engaged in a number of multi-stakeholder initiatives to shape global, regional and industry agendas. He is on the advisory boards of several international business schools. He has co-founded two firms and is on the board of several startups. He received the European Case of the Year from the European Case Clearing House in 2002, 2000, 1998, and 1997.

Dutta received a B.Tech. in electrical engineering and computer science from the Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi. He received an MS in business administration, an MS in computer science, and a PhD in computer science from the University of California at Berkeley. He is married to Lourdes Casanova, a native of Spain who is currently a lecturer at the Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of Management, where she specializes in international business with a focus on Latin America and multinationals from emerging markets. The couple has a daughter, currently studying at Oxford University.

Current Books

Professor Dutta has authored and co-authored several books, including the most recent “Throwing Sheep in the Boardroom: How Online Social Networking Will Transform Your Life, Work and World”  investigating the implications of social network services for the enterprise which he co-authored with Matthew Fraser. Another of his recent books was more centered on leadership development, titled “Innovating at the Top: How Global CEOs Drive Innovation for Growth and Profit”  which was co-authored with Roland Berger, Geoffrey Samuels and Tobias Raffel.

In addition, every year Dutta co-authors “The Global Information Technology Report” produced by the World Economic Forum, which remains the world’s most comprehensive and authoritative international assessment of the impact of Information and communication technologies (ICT) on the development process and the competitiveness of nations.

In May 2009, Dutta participated in the first Connected Speakers seminar, hosted by the Supreme Council for Information & Communication Technology ictQATAR. Drawing from his book "Throwing Sheep in the Boardroom", Dutta addressed the Web 2.0 revolution and how social networking is changing the way people communicate both personally and professionally.

Dutta's Strategies at Johnson

Dutta has articulated three areas of strategic focus since becoming Dean of the Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of Management. First, Dutta has expressed interest in working closely with Cornell's NYC Tech Campus in order to strengthen the Johnson MBA. Second, Dutta has prioritized Johnson's global engagement, which in practice will mean extending Johnson's recruiting, research, and programming opportunities throughout the world, and with a strong initial focus on China. Third, Dutta has made a commitment to increasing the quality of Johnson MBA applicants and to creating more dual-degree and other program combinations between Johnson and Cornell's numerous other professional and discipline-based schools.

Current Affiliations

Dutta is actively involved in policy development at national and European levels. He is currently a member of the Advisory Committee for ICT for the Government of Qatar and has advised other national governments on ICT policy issues. He is the Chairman of the European Commission's Europe Innova panel on Innovation in the ICT sector and a member of the Steering Committee of eBSN, the European Commission's eBusiness Network initiative for SMEs.

Dutta in the Media

	 B-schools can't be blamed for "2008" crisis: Soumitra Dutta

	 10 Most Successful IITians in America

	 The Innovativeness of Nations

	 Nordic Countries Lead World in Global Information Technology

	 IIT Graduate Soumitra Dutta to Head Cornell's Business School

Profile Page

	 Dean Dutta's Profile

Pictures

Videos

	 Meet Dean Dutta


