
#Article: Sreenath Sreenivasan
#Type: regular article

Sreenath "Sree" Sreenivasan (born October 28, 1970) is the chief digital officer at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and a technology journalist based in New York City. He was previously the chief digital officer of Columbia University and has served as an academic administrator and professor in the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism. In 2015, he was named one of Fast Company magazine's Most Creative People of the year.

Early life

Sreenivasan was born in Tokyo, Japan, and grew up in USSR, United States, Fiji, and India. Sreenivasan's father was a diplomat for the Indian government which meant his family often relocated. He attended kindergarten in Moscow, P.S. 6 in Manhattan, Marist Brothers High School in Suva, Fiji, and St. Stephen's College in Delhi, India. He graduated from Columbia University with a Bachelor of Arts in history in 1991 and received a Master of Science degree in journalism from the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism in 1993.

Career

Sreenivasan was on the faculty of the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism since 1993 as a professor of professional practice. His courses at Columbia focused on new media, web design and social media in the practice of journalism as well as media entrepreneurship. Currently still serving as an adjunct professor, he also regularly runs workshops for working journalists on the advanced use of the Internet and multimedia reporting.

In 2005, Sreenivasan was appointed Dean of Students at the Journalism School, overseeing student-oriented programs. He is the former advisor to the school's chapter of the Society of Professional Journalists and won the David Eshelman Award for Outstanding Campus Advisor in 1998. In 2008, he was named Dean of Student Affairs, supervising admissions, student services and career services at the school. On July 11, 2012, Columbia University named Sreenivasan its first Chief Digital Officer.

Sreenivasan was appointed the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Chief Digital Officer in August 2013. In this role he supervises 70 employees throughout the museum.

Sreenivasan helped found SAJA, the South Asian Journalists Association, a group of over 1,000  journalists of South Asian origin in the U.S. and Canada and served as its first president and continues to serve on the board and as an editor and writer of SAJAforum, one of the most widely read South Asian news and analysis blogs.

He served as the "Tech Guru" on WABC-TV for six years, before moving to WNBC-TV as technology reporter in January 2007. He appeared twice a week on the air and on WNBC.com until January 2009. From 2009 through 2011, Sreenivasan helped launch and develop DNAinfo.com, a hyperlocal news startup covering Manhattan, founded by Ameritrade founder and Chicago Cubs owner Joe Ricketts.

Accolades

In 2004, Newsweek magazine named him one of the 20 most influential South Asians in the U.S.

In 2007, India Abroad named him one of the 50 most Influential Indian Americans in the U.S.

In 2010, Quill magazine, published by the Society of Professional Journalists, named him one of 20 journalists to follow on Twitter 

In 2015, he was named one of Fast Company magazine's Most Creative People of the year at number 39.

Personal life

He became a US Citizen in 2013. He is married to Roopa Unnikrishnan.


