
#Article: Sridhar Babu
#Type: regular article

Duddilla Sridhar Babu is an Indian politician and was a member of theAndhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly, representing the Indian National Congress. He was the Minister for Civil Supplies, Consumer Affairs, Legal Metrology and Legislative Affairs in the Government of Andhra Pradesh prior to that state being divided. He is a member of the Pradesh Election Committee of Telangana as the Manifesto Committee Chairman.

Background

Duddilla Sridhar Babu is the fourth of six children of former Speaker of the Andhra Pradesh Assembly, the Indian National Congress politician Sri D. Sripada Rao. He graduated from the University of Delhi and was a practising lawyer at Andhra Pradesh High Court before entering politics in 1999 following the assassination of his father by Naxalites. At that time he decided that it was incumbent on him to continue the work of his father in the Manthani constituency and more generally in the Karimnagar district in which it is situated.

A keen cricketer as a student — he represented Nizam College and the University of Hyderabad — Babu married married Shailaja Ramaiyer, an officer in the Indian Administrative Service, following his election to the legislative assembly. The couple have two children. He said in 2012 that he still hoped to fulfil his earlier ambition to establish a firm specialising in corporate law.

Career

Sridhar Babu is known for carrying out developmental works in the Backward region of Manthani ever since he became a Member of the Legislative Assembly and is believed to be always close to the people of the region.

First term (1999-2004)

Sridhar Babu won on the Congress ticket from Manthani in the 1999 elections, though his Congress party was relegated to sitting in the opposition. He defeated his nearest rival, C. Rami Reddy of the Telugu Desam Party, by a margin of over 15,000 votes.

Second term (2004-2009)

By the time Y. S. Rajasekhar Reddy undertook his padayatra in 2003, Sridhar Babu was the Karimnagar district party president. In the 2004 elections, in which the Congress Party gained power, he defeated the TDP candidate, Somarapu Satyanarayana, by a margin of 42,560 votes. He became a Government Whip in the 12th Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly.

Third term (2009-2014)

He was re-elected in the 2009 Assembly Elections defeating Putta Madhu of the erstwhile Praja Rajyam Party by a margin of over 13,000 votes. He was the only Congress MLA to be re-elected in 2009 from Karimnagar district, amidst a strong showing from an alliance of the Telangana Rashtra Samithi and Telugu Desam Party.

Babu was appointed a member of Y. S. Reddy's cabinet in May 2009 as minister for Higher Education and NRI affairs. After serving the ministry for 1.5 years he moved to the Civil Supplies and Legislative affairs ministry in Kiran Kumar Reddy's cabinet. He resigned from the cabinet on 2 January 2014 after Reddy divested him of his Legislative Affairs portfolio when the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Bill, which concerns the creation of a separate Telangana state, was being discussed in the Assembly.

Offices held


