
#Article: Sri Srinivasan
#Type: regular article

Padmanabhan Srikanth "Sri" Srinivasan (born February 23, 1967) is a United States Circuit Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. He was confirmed by the United States Senate by a vote of 97-0 on May 23, 2013. Before being confirmed as a judge he was the Principal Deputy Solicitor General of the United States and he has argued 25 cases before the U.S. Supreme Court and was also a lecturer at Harvard Law School. Srinivasan also is known for having represented former Enron executive Jeffrey Skilling in his appeal before the U.S. Supreme Court, Skilling v. United States (2010).

Early life and education

Srinivasan was born Padmanabhan Srikanth Srinivasan in Chandigarh, India. His father hailed from Mela Thiruvenkatanathapuram, an Indian village near Tirunelveli-Tamil Nadu. His family, including two younger sisters, migrated in the late 1960s to Lawrence, Kansas. His father was a professor of mathematics at the University of Kansas, and his mother taught at the Kansas City Art Institute and later worked at the University of Kansas computer science department. Srinivasan graduated from Lawrence High School in Lawrence, where he played basketball, sharing the court with future NBA star Danny Manning.

Srinivasan earned a bachelor's degree in 1989 from Stanford University and then earned an J.D./M.B.A. in 1995 from Stanford Law School and Stanford Graduate School of Business.

After law school, Srinivasan worked as a law clerk for United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit Judge J. Harvie Wilkinson III and then was a clerk for U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor.

Professional career

After his clerkships, Srinivasan worked for the law firm O'Melveny & Myers and then joined the office of the United States Solicitor General, where he worked from 2002 until 2007. He rejoined O'Melveny & Myers in 2007 as a partner, and was the firm's hiring partner for its Washington, D.C. office.  He made the news in 2010 for representing Skilling in his appeal before the U.S. Supreme Court, which challenged the "honest services" fraud statute and also the fact that Skilling's trial was never moved from Houston.  The Supreme Court ruled in favor of Skilling on the "honest services" fraud statute, but rejected the trial location argument.

Srinivasan also is a lecturer at Harvard Law School, where he co-teaches a course on Supreme Court and appellate advocacy.

On August 26, 2011, Srinivasan was appointed to replace Neal Katyal as Principal Deputy Solicitor General of the United States. As of May 2013, Srinivasan had argued 25 cases before the U.S. Supreme Court. Earlier in his career, he also performed pro bono work for presidential candidate Al Gore during the aftermath of the 2000 presidential election. He left office on May 24, 2013, upon appointment to the Court of Appeals.

Federal judicial service

In March 2010, National Review blogger Ed Whelan wrote that the Obama administration had been considering nominating Srinivasan to one of two vacancies on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit and that the idea of nominating Srinivasan had run into some opposition from some Obama supporters because of Srinivasan's work in the U.S. Solicitor General's office during the Bush administration and because of union animosity to Srinivasan's corporate clients in private practice.

On June 11, 2012, Obama nominated Srinivasan to the seat on the D.C. Circuit. On January 2, 2013, his nomination was returned to the President, due to the sine die adjournment of the Senate.

On January 3, 2013, he was renominated to the same office.

His Senate confirmation hearing on April 10, 2013, was uneventful. His nomination was reported to the floor of the Senate on May 16, 2013, by a unanimous vote of 18 ayes to 0 nays. A final vote on his nomination took place on May 23, 2013, where he was confirmed 97-0. He received his commission on May 24, 2013. He received the oath of office from Chief Judge Merrick Garland on June 18, 2013.

In April 2013, Mother Jones suggested that Srinivasan ultimately might be nominated by Obama for the Supreme Court of the United States; during the same month, Jeffrey Toobin also speculated that should he be confirmed for the D.C. Circuit, he would be President Obama's next nominee to the Supreme Court.

Personal

Srinivasan lives in Arlington, Virginia. He has been married to Carla Garrett.

See also

	 Barack Obama Supreme Court candidates


