
#Article: Stacey Jackson
#Type: regular article

Stacey Jackson (born Stacey Liane Levy), is a Canadian-American singer, Executive Producer at 3B1G Records. and founder of StaeFit workout apparel.She is married to OpCapita founder Henry Jackson and has four children.

Music

Jackson's career has seen the release of two albums and seven independent singles. Jackson's album "Upside Down" was released in October 2009 and is a collection of remixed Motown covers, some of which feature children who have previously performed at Music For Youth's Schools Proms. All profits from the sales of "Upside Down" went to Music For Youth.  Jackson's single, I Am A Woman, was released in 2011. The music video was released shortly after, showing her singing on a private jet having walked through her pantry to avoid the chaos of her family. In 2012, the track was remixed and that video was replaced with a video that was recorded in conjunction with MTV and featured Jenna Jonathan, a reality TV cast member from MTV's The Valleys. In February 2011, Stacey Jackson travelled to Boston, Massachusetts, where she spent a weekend in the studio with Snoop Dogg recording a collaborative single, "Live it Up".

In April 2012, Stacey was invited to present an award at the International Dance Music Awards in Miami, Florida.  Pointing Fingers released April 2013 is featured on her debut album 'Live It Up'. The music video was shot in New York featuring some of the cast of Made in Chelsea; Spencer Matthews and Binky Felstead. The single reached Number 21 on the American Billboard Dance Chart  and number 8 on UK Club Charts.  In May 2014 Stacey released the single “Dance The Night Away” which peaked in the Dance Charts Hits at number 11 in the UK. The music video features Made in Chelsea star Binky Felstead, actor Terry Noble  and dancer Tobias Mead, Britain’s Got Talent finalist.

In July 2015 Stacey released an other single titled "How Much Is That Hottie In The Window." The track features Andrew Derbyshire who appeared on Britain's Got Talent in 2014. The single debuted at #22 on the UK Commercial pop club chart, it is one of the tracks off the 3-volume dance album entitled "Stae Pumped" set to be released in early 2016. Stacey also continues to perform around the world including many gay prides in the UK including Manchester, Reading, Bristol, Birmingham, Cardiff, Belfast and Chesterfield pride in 2015.

Personal life

Jackson (née Levy) was born in Montréal, Canada to Florrie and Michael Levy. Her father, Michael, a graphic designer. After Stacey was born, he created a range of greeting cards and taking her name - Stacey Liane. Growing up, Jackson attended a Jewish day school, Bialik, in Montréal. In 2012, she was chosen as the school's Concert Gala honoree. Jackson is proficient in French, Hebrew and Yiddish.  Stacey moved to New York to begin her television career at CBS News, before going on to Lifetime Television as a senior publicist and awards coordinator. During this period working in television, Jackson continued her singing career with various bands including her Motown tribute band Fuzzy Dice.  She is the mother of four living in London. She is married to American businessman, Henry Jackson. Stacey Jackson is also actively involved with charities such as Music For Youth  and Breast Cancer Charities of America (BCCA).

Chart Placement

Discography

Albums:

	 StaePumped (Releasing Early 2016)

	 Live It Up (2013)

	 Upside Down (2010) Music For Youth

Released Singles:

	 How Much Is That Hottie In The Window? (2015)

	 Pointing Fingers (2013)

	 Is This Love (2012)

	 I Am A Woman Remixes (2012)

	 I Am a Woman (2011) 

	 Live It Up Ft. Snoop Dogg (2011)

	 I Hear A Symphony (2010)

	 Band Of Gold (2010)


