
#Article: Stephen Quartermain
#Type: regular article

Stephen William Quartermain (born 7 May 1962) is an Australian television personality and journalist/presenter.

Early career

Quartermain began his career as a cadet journalist with Leader Newspapers in January 1980.He then joined the ABC in 1982 where he worked as a radio and television journalist covering general news, politics, police rounds, finance, industrial affairs and sport.ABC cadet

Television career (Network Ten)

In December 1984, Quartermain joined Network Ten where, during the 1980s, he covered events such as the Seoul Olympics, Wimbledon, The Ashes and the world gymnastics championships. He was also a member of the "Eyewitness News Team".

In 1991, he hosted the sports program Sportsweek. He also covered Commonwealth games, the Sydney Olympics and other special sporting events including AFL, Rugby League, Basketball and Swimming.

From 1998 until 2004, he appeared on shows such as The Panel, providing sports reports, and commentated Australian Football League matches for Network Ten when they gained the rights in 2002. Starting with the 2009 season, he has co-hosted with Robert Walls the new football discussion show One Week at a Time on Network Ten's HD channel One. Stephen hosted five Brownlow Medal ceremony presentations, hosted and called eight AFL Grand Finals until Network Ten lost the football rights at the end of the 2011 season.

After Network Ten lost the rights to televise AFL, Quartermain remained at the network, retaining his role as weekday sports presenter for the Ten Eyewitness News bulletin in Melbourne. In 2013, he became the Friday presenter of Ten Eyewitness News, with Mal Walden wanting to downscale his on-air role.

In December 2013, after presenting the main news bulletin for two days per week for some months, Quartermain replaced Walden and became the full-time presenter of Ten Eyewitness News Melbourne.

Stephen was also an occasional fill-in host on morning show, 9am with David and Kim.He is a member of the MCG Media Hall of Fame and a life member of the Australian Football Media Association.

Radio career

Triple M

Quartermain began his AFL radio commentary career at Magic in 1995 before joining Triple M where he worked from 1997 to 2011.

3AW

In 2013, Quartermain joined radio station 3AW as an AFL commentator but left at the end of the season following his appointment as the chief news presenter at Network Ten Melbourne.

Personal life

Quartermain was married to then Keno presenter Julie Quartermain from 1992 until their divorce in 2000. His married again in 2003 to Paige, and has a son from his first marriage and a daughter from his second marriage.  He is a supporter of the Hawthorn Football Club.


