
#Article: Sue Cook
#Type: regular article

Susan "Sue" Cook (born Susan Lorraine Thomas, 30 March 1949, Ruislip, Middlesex) is a British presenter and author.

Early life

Cook's father, William Thomas, worked for the Commission on Industrial Relations (later ACAS). She has two younger brothers and lived on Burnham Avenue in Ickenham. She attended Glebe Primary School, then passed her eleven plus exam, enabling her to attend the newly opened Vyners Grammar School, also in Ickenham on Warren Road. She gained ten O-levels and three A-levels, and went on to University of Leicester, graduating in 1971 to gain an honours degree in psychology.

Career

Cooks broadcasting career began as a producer, presenter, and DJ for Londons Capital Radio before moving to the BBC where, over the next twenty years, she presented programmes for both radio and television - notably, You and Yours, Making History, Nationwide, Breakfast Time, Were Going Places, Children in Need, Out of Court and Crimewatch. Other BBC TV presenting credits include Pebble Mill At One, Daytime Live, Omnibus at the Proms, Having a Baby, Out of This World and the Childrens Royal Variety Performance. She was a regular guest on Call My Bluff, and a member of Holidays team of reporters. For Channel 4 she hosted the popular afternoon show Collectors Lot. She also appeared briefly as herself in the BBC television drama serial Edge of Darkness (1985) and in The Life and Loves of a She-Devil (1986).

Recognition

The University of Leicester, the university conferred an honorary D.Litt degree on Cook in 1997 in recognition of her contribution to British broadcasting.

Publications

Cook's first two novels, On Dangerous Ground (2006) and Force of Nature (2009), were first published by Hodder Headline. Both novels are now available on Amazon as eBooks. She devised and presents a supportive series for writers, The Write Lines, for BBC Oxford and is a patron of the annual Chipping Norton Literary Festival. She is currently writing her third novel.

Film

Cook is executive producer for Tracker starring Ray Winstone and released in the UK in April 2011. She also script edited the film.She is adapting her first novel, On Dangerous Ground, for the screen.

Alan Partridge

Cook has been memorably immortalized in the Alan Partridge universe as an object of Alan's unrequited affections.

Personal life

Cook lives in Oxfordshire with her third husband, the film director Ian Sharp, whom she married in 2004. She has two children, Charlie Williams, son to former husband John Williams (the classical guitarist), and Megan Macqueen, daughter to children's television and GMTV producer Billy Macqueen, with whom Cook lived for fifteen years. Her first marriage was in 1971, to the musician Brian Cook, whom she met at Leicester University.


