
#Article: Susan Love
#Type: regular article

Susan M. Love (born February 9, 1948) is an American surgeon, a prominent advocate of preventive breast cancer research, and author. She is regarded as one of the most respected women’s health specialists in the United States. In 2012 Love announced that she was diagnosed with leukemia and would take a leave of absence to pursue chemotherapy treatment. After a successful treatment, Love returned to work the following year.

Early life and education

Love was born in Little Silver, New Jersey and moved to Puerto Rico as a teenager. She enrolled at Fordham University after having spent five unsuccessful months as a nun with the School Sisters of Notre Dame.

She received her medical degree from SUNY Downstate Medical School cum laude in 1974 and did her surgical residency at Boston's Beth Israel Medical Center.  She also graduated from the Executive MBA program at the UCLA Anderson School of Management.

Career

Love is a clinical professor of surgery at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA. In 1998 she was appointed by former President Clinton to serve on the National Cancer Advisory Board, where she served until 2004. She maintains a board position at the National Cancer Institute, and continues to serve as an Adjunct Professor of Surgery at UCLA. Love also serves as the medical director of the Dr. Susan Love Research Foundation, formerly titled The Santa Barbara Breast Cancer Institute. She lectures nationally and internationally on breast cancer, menopause, and women's health.

Through her organization, Love has launched several studies, initiatives, and coalitions on the subject of breast cancer such as the Army of Women and The Health of Women.

Bibliography (selective)

Books

	Dr. Susan Love’s Menopause and Hormone Book (2003)

	Live a Little!: Breaking the Rules Won't Break Your Health (2009)

	Dr. Susan Love's breast book (2010)

Most cited peer-reviewed articles

	Irene Gage M.D., Stuart J. Schnitt M.D., Asa J. Nixon M.D., Barbara Silver B.A., Abram Recht M.D., Susan L. Troyan M.D., Timothy Eberlein M.D., Susan M. Love M.D., Rebecca Gelman Ph.D., Jay R. Harris M.D., James L. Connolly M.D. "Pathologic margin involvement and the risk of recurrence in patients treated with breast-conserving therapy" Cancer November 1996, Vol 78, Issue 9, pages 1921-1928 (cited 315 times in Google Scholar as of March 2014) 

	Mary-Claire King, PhD; Sarah Rowell, MPH; Susan M. Love, MD. Inherited breast and ovarian cancer: What are the risks? What are the choices? JAMA 1993, Vol 269, Issue 15, pages 1975-1980 (cited 246 times in Google Scholar as of March 2014)

See also

	 Cancer (2015 PBS film)

	 History of cancer

	 History of cancer chemotherapy

	 The Emperor of All Maladies: A Biography of Cancer


