
#Article: Suzanne Crouch
#Type: regular article

Suzanne Crouch is an American Republican Party politician who is currently the 56th state Auditor of Indiana.

A member of the Republican Party, Crouch formerly served in the Indiana House of Representatives from 2005 to 2014. On December 15, 2013, was appointed by Governor Mike Pence to serve as the 56th State Auditor of Indiana, after the resignation and brief tenure of former State Auditor Dwayne Sawyer. Crouch was reelected to that position in 2014.

Early life

Crouch graduated from Mater Dei High School in Evansville and received her Bachelor of Science degree from Purdue University, majoring in political science. Prior to her service in local government, Suzanne served as Vanderburgh County Republican Central Committee Chairman for 4 years. Under her chairmanship, a majority of Republicans were elected to County Council, the first time in 60 years that Republicans controlled that body.

Vanderburgh County Auditor

Crouch was elected Vanderburgh County Auditor in 1994. During her two terms as Auditor, she established a reputation of fighting for government efficiency, responsiveness, accountability and accessibility. As Auditor, her office received, for the first time in decades, a clean bill of health every year from the State Board of Accounts.

Vanderburgh County Commissioner

In 2002, Suzanne was elected to the Vanderburgh County Board of Commissioners and served as President until the end of her term in 2005. She worked to televise weekly Commission meetings and by holding public hearings to seek the public's input on important issues. While serving as president, the Commissioners, for the first time ever, applied and received federal transportation dollars for a local road project.

Indiana State Representative

In 2005 the district 78 seat for state representative was vacated by Vaneta Becker, who had moved to the State Senate to fill the vacated seat of Greg Server. House District 78 contains parts of Spencer, Vanderburgh and Warrick counties. Portions of Evansville, as well as Newburgh, Richland, Hatfield, Darmstadt and McCutchanville are within the borders of the district. Crouch was elected to fill the position in a caucus by precinct committeemen. She was appointed Vice Chairman of Public Health Committee in the state legislature. Crouch was challenged in the 2006 republican primary by conservative activist Jonathan Fulton but easily defeated him winning 63% of the vote.

Indiana State Auditor

After the resignation of Indiana State Auditor Dwayne Sawyer in 2013, Crouch was appointed to fill the position. In 2014, after the completion of Sawyer's term, the Republican Party of Indiana officially nominated Crouch to stand in that year's elections. On November 4, Crouch was elected with a 23 percent margin against Democratic Party candidate Mike Claytor, winning 59.6 percent of the vote

Drug policy

Salvia divinorum

Crouch was proposed a bill that would have declared the psychoactive herb Salvia divinorum a Schedule 1 controlled substance.

Alcohol

Alcohol related financial contributions featured highly for Representative Suzanne Crouch's 2006 political campaign. According to the National Institute on Money in State Politics, 'Beer, Wine & Liquor' was her eighth highest industry contributor.

Citations


