
#Article: James Corden
#Type: regular article

James Kimberley Corden, OBE (born 22 August 1978) is an English actor, writer, producer, comedian, singer, and television host. He currently hosts the late-night television talk show The Late Late Show with James Corden on CBS, succeeding Craig Ferguson, whose decade-long tenure on The Late Late Show ended in December 2014. Corden has also presented the Sky 1 comedy panel show A League of Their Own since 2010.

Corden co-created, co-wrote and starred in the BBC sitcom Gavin & Stacey (2007-2010), for which he won the BAFTA Television Award for Best Comedy Performance. He was featured on the No.1 single "Shout", along with British grime artist Dizzee Rascal, an unofficial anthem of the England football team for the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa.

In 2011, he played the lead part in the comedy play One Man, Two Guvnors, which transferred from the National Theatre to the West End and then to Broadway, and was also cinecast worldwide via National Theatre Live. For his performance in the Broadway run of the play, Corden won the 2012 Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play.

Early life

Corden was born in Hillingdon, Greater London, the son of Margaret and Malcolm Corden. His father was a musician in the Royal Air Force band and his mother was a social worker. He grew up in Hazlemere, Buckinghamshire and attended Park Middle School and Holmer Green Upper School. He has an older sister, Andrea Henry, and a younger sister, Ruth Corden.

Career

Early career

Corden's first stage appearance was at the age of 18 with a one-line part in the 1996 musical Martin Guerre. His early television work included Gareth Jones in the 1999 series Boyz Unlimited, He also starred in Tango advertisements in 1998 and had a role as a bookish student in Teachers and in 2000 a small part in an episode of Hollyoaks. Corden had guest appearances on Little Britain and Dalziel and Pascoe, both in 2004. Corden's early film credits include Whatever Happened to Harold Smith? (1999), Mike Leigh's All or Nothing (2002), Heartlands (2002), and Cruise of the Gods (2002).

Rise to prominence

From 2000 through early 2005, Corden starred in the British television series Fat Friends as Jamie Rymer. He garnered a nomination for the 2000 Royal Television Society Award for Network Newcomer On Screen for his work. Beginning in 2004, Corden played the role of Timms in the original London stage production of Alan Bennett's play The History Boys, as well as in the Broadway, Sydney, Wellington and Hong Kong productions and radio and 2006 film adaptation versions of the play. Also in 2006, he appeared in the film Starter for 10.

From 2007 through early 2010, Corden co-starred in his own series, the BBC Three sitcom Gavin & Stacey. He co-wrote the series with his Fat Friends co-star Ruth Jones; Corden and Jones played the two friends of the two title characters. The series proved popular and was well-received critically. For the show, Corden won Best Male Comedy Performer and Gavin & Stacey won Best New British Television Comedy at the 2007 British Comedy Awards. At the 2008 Television BAFTAs, Corden won the BAFTA for Best Male Comedy Performance, and Gavin & Stacey won the BAFTA's Audience Award for Programme of the Year. In December 2008 the show won Best TV Comedy in the 2008 British Comedy Awards. Gavin & Stacey also won the award for Most Popular Comedy Programme at the National Television Awards in 2010.

Work outside Gavin & Stacey

During the two year, seven months run of Gavin & Stacey, Corden's professional endeavours outside the successful series proved somewhat checkered. He guest hosted Big Brother's Big Mouth, with Gavin & Stacey co-star Mathew Horne, in August 2007. In 2008, he appeared in the film of Toby Young's autobiography How to Lose Friends & Alienate People. He collaborated again with Horne on a 2009 sketch show named Horne & Corden, described by the BBC as a "traditional comedy entertainment show in the style of Morecambe and Wise". The show ran for only one series and was poorly received by the critics, with Corden later admitting "the absolute truth is I wasn't good enough."

In 2009, Corden starred as the lead character in the film Lesbian Vampire Killers, which was not a success. That year he was in the main cast of the feature Telstar, and likewise in the animated Planet 51 along with Mathew Horne.

In February 2009, he co-presented the BRIT Awards with Mathew Horne and Kylie Minogue. On 13 March 2009, he appeared in a sketch for Comic Relief giving the England football team a motivational talk, and later presented a section with Horne showing their best bits of comedy from the previous two years along with highlights from the night.

In March 2010, Corden began hosting the Sky1 comedy/sports panel show A League of Their Own alongside team captains Andrew Flintoff and Jamie Redknapp. In March 2010, he presented Sport Relief 2010 alongside Davina McCall and others, and contributed a "sequel" to the 2009 England football team sketch, this time giving a motivational talk to various sport stars including Jenson Button and David Beckham.

In March 2010, Corden took part in Channel 4's Comedy Gala, a benefit show held in aid of Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital, filmed live at the O2 Arena in London. On 5 June 2010, he performed his England World Cup single with Dizzee Rascal on the finale of Britain's Got Talent. The proceeds from the single went to Great Ormond Street Hospital. 

In June 2010, Corden played Craig Owens in the Doctor Who episode "The Lodger", in which the Doctor moved in with him. Corden returned as Owens in "Closing Time" in the sixth series. In December 2010, This Is JLS, an hour long Christmas special featuring the boyband and The X Factor runners up, was aired on ITV1, with Corden writing and producing some of the sketches featured in the special. In 2010 he also was in the main cast of the film Gulliver's Travels.

One Man, Two Guvnors & other projects

In February 2011, Corden again presented the 2011 BRIT Awards. In March, Corden reprised his Gavin & Stacey role as Smithy in a Red Nose Day sketch for Comic Relief. The sketch included appearances by Gordon Brown, JLS, Paul McCartney and Justin Bieber. It received positive reviews from critics and was highly regarded as the best sketch of the night. In 2011, he appeared in The Three Musketeers.

Starting in June 2011, Corden played the lead role in the hit comedy play One Man, Two Guvnors. The play was also cinecast worldwide as part of the National Theatre Live cinecasts, and transferred from the National Theatre to the West End after touring. The show received universal critical acclaim, and won Best Play at the Evening Standard Theatre Awards for 2011.

The Guardian deemed it "A triumph of visual and verbal comedy. One of the funniest productions in the National's history." The Daily Telegraph described it as "the feelgood hit of the Summer"; while The Independent called it a "massive hit", and the Evening Standard "a surefire hit".

Corden made a cameo appearance in the music video for the single "Mama Do the Hump" by Rizzle Kicks, released in December 2011, which reached #2 in the charts. In April 2012, One Man, Two Guvnors transferred to Broadway, with Corden continuing to play the lead. In June 2012, he won the Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Play for his performance.

In February 2012, Corden hosted the BRIT Awards for the third time. Corden starred as the Baker in the film adaptation of the musical Into the Woods (2014).

The Wrong Mans

For his next project Corden teamed with friend and fellow Gavin & Stacey star Mathew Baynton to create, write and star in The Wrong Mans, a six-part comedy-thriller for BBC Two. The premiere was on 24 September 2013. The series is co-produced by online television provider Hulu.com in the United States where it began airing in November 2013.

The Late Late Show

On 8 September 2014, CBS announced that Corden was to succeed Craig Ferguson as host of the American late-night talk show The Late Late Show on 23 March 2015.

Personal life

Corden is married to Julia Carey since September 15, 2012. The couple have two children: son Max (born March 22, 2011), and daughter Carey (born October 27, 2014). He is a supporter of West Ham United F.C.

Corden was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2015 New Year Honours for services to drama. He received the honour from Princess Anne during a ceremony at Buckingham Palace on 25 June.

Filmography

Film

Television

Theatre

Video games

Music videos

Discography

Singles

Awards and nominations

Published works

	 


