
#Article: Tasma Walton
#Type: regular article

Tasma Walton (born 19 August 1973 in Geraldton, Western Australia) is an Australian television and film actress.

Acting career

Walton joined local radio station 6GE and trained as a production assistant and copy writer in her home town. She was accepted into the National Institute of Dramatic Art (NIDA) but dropped out after two years. She joined a small Sydney theatre, and in 1995 played the recurring role of Rachel Watson in Home and Away.

In 1996, Walton was cast as Dash McKinley in the police drama series Blue Heelers. Her character was introduced halfway through Season 3. To win the role of Dash, Walton auditioned three times. Her second one with William McInnes (Nick Schultz) gained her the role. In the audition Schultz yelled at Dash and while some of the other actresses burst into tears, Walton reacted by laughing. In the same year she made her film debut in Fistful of Flies. Her last episode of Blue Heelers, "The Full Circle" screened in mid-1999. Walton stated that she was leaving the series to pursue other acting projects and to be with her then boyfriend in Sydney.

She has since appeared in a variety of film and TV productions, including Water Rats, Sea Patrol, The Postcard Bandit and Perdition. She also won recurring roles in White Collar Blue and BeastMaster.

In 2009, Walton joined the cast of City Homicide in the semi-regular role of criminal profiler, Claudia Leigh. On 27 July 2013, it was announced that Walton had rejoined the cast of Home and Away in the guest role of Jade Montgomery.

Personal life

Walton was in a relationship with Danny Roberts for seven and a half years until 2004. She began dating Rove McManus in October 2007. They married in a private ceremony in Broome, Western Australia on 16 June 2009. In September 2013, Walton and McManus announced that they were expecting their first child. The couple's daughter was born two weeks prematurely on 16 December 2013.

Filmography

Books

	 Heartless (Fiction) (Pub Date 28/9/09)

Theatre

	 Theatre (Sydney)

Awards

	 At the 39th Annual TV Week Logie Awards held in 1997, Walton won the Logie for the "Most Popular New Talent" for her role as "Constable Dash McKinley" on Blue Heelers.

	Walton was nominated for Best Actress at the 3rd AACTA Awards for her role in Mystery Road, but lost against Rose Byrne for The Turning.


