
#Article: Jill Soloway
#Type: regular article

Jill Soloway (born September 26, 1965) is an American comedian, playwright, feminist and Emmy-winning television writer and award-winning director who won the Best Director award at the Sundance Film Festival for directing and writing the film Afternoon Delight. She is also known for her work on Six Feet Under and for creating, writing, executive producing and directing the Amazon original series Transparent.

Early life

Soloway was born in Chicago, Illinois, the daughter of public relations consultant, coach and writer, Elaine Soloway, and psychiatrist father, Dr. Harry J. Soloway. Around 2011 Soloway's father came out as transgender.

She has an older sister, Faith Soloway, a Boston-based musician and performer with whom she sometimes collaborates. They both attended Lane Technical College Prep High School in Chicago. Her family is Jewish. She graduated from the University of Wisconsin-Madison as a Communications Arts major.

Soloway's mother was formerly a press aide to Chicago Mayor Jane Byrne and was a former communications director for School Superintendent Ruth Love. After 30 years, Soloway's parents divorced. Soloway has a stepfather named Tommy Madison.

Career

While at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Soloway was a film/TV student of JJ Murphy and participated in the creation of an undergraduate experimental narrative film entitled Ring Of Fire as the AD under director Anita Katzman.

After college she worked as a production assistant in commercials and music videos in Chicago, as well as at Kartemquin Films on the movie Hoop Dreams.

While in Chicago, Soloway and her sister co-developed a parody of The Brady Bunch TV show for live stage called The Real Live Brady Bunch, which began her professional theatrical writing and directing endeavors. With her sister, she sold a pilot script to HBO called Jewess Jones about a female superhero. Also at the Annoyance Theatre in Chicago, she and Faith created plays The Miss Vagina Pageant, and later, while in Los Angeles, Not Without My Nipples. Her short story "Courteney Cox's Asshole" caught the attention of Alan Ball and got her hired on Six Feet Under.

With Maggie Rowe, Jill co-created Hollywood Hellhouse and Sit n' Spin.

Television

Soloway began her TV writing career on shows such as The Oblongs, Nikki and The Steve Harvey Show. She followed those shows by writing for four seasons on the HBO original series Six Feet Under, ultimately serving as co-executive producer. Six Feet Under ran from 2001 to 2005 for five seasons.

Six Feet Under episodes

	"Back to the Garden" (2002)

	"I'll Take You" (2002)

	"Making Love Work" (2003)

	"I'm Sorry, I'm Lost" (2003)

	"Parallel Play" (2004)

	"The Black Forest" (2004) with Craig Wright

	"The Rainbow of Her Reasons" (2005)

Soloway later wrote on Dirty Sexy Money, Grey's Anatomy, Tell Me You Love Me, and was executive producer/showrunner for the second season of Showtime's United States of Tara created by writer Diablo Cody as well as HBO's How to Make it in America, created by Ian Edelman.

Soloway created the pilot Transparent for Amazon.com, which became available for free streaming and download on February 6, 2014 and was part of Amazon's second pilot season. She was inspired by her father, who came out as transgender. The show stars Gaby Hoffman, Jay Duplass, and Amy Landecker as siblings whose father (played by Jeffrey Tambor) reveals she is going through a significant life transition.

The pilot for Transparent was picked up by Amazon Studios.

As part of the making of the show, Soloway enacted a "transfirmative action program", whereby transgender applicants are hired in preference to nontransgender ones. , over eighty transgender people have worked on the show, including two transgender consultants. All the bathrooms on set are gender-neutral.

Soloway wrote the role Gaby Hoffmann plays in Transparent for her after seeing her performance on Louis C.K.'s most recent season of Louie. Transparent premiered all ten episodes simultaneously in late September 2014.

Film

In addition to television, she has written and directed two films that have premiered at the Sundance Film Festival: Una Hora Por Favora (2012) and Afternoon Delight (2013), for which she won the Directing Award.

Afternoon Delight played at national and international film festivals and was nominated for multiple awards, including a Gotham Award for Breakthrough Performance for Kathryn Hahn, and a Spirit Award for First Feature.

Writing

She wrote the novella Jodi K., which was published in the collection Three Kinds of Asking For It: Erotic Novellas edited by Susie Bright. Jill's memoir, Tiny Ladies in Shiny Pants: Based on a True Story, was released in hardcover in 2005, and then in paperback in 2006.

Themes

Soloway said that she feels that she's always been writing similar themes, what she calls "The Heroine's Journey," which is "about repairing the divided feminine: the wife and the other woman confronting each other -- mom, stripper. That I think women's journeys are really about repairing these sort of divided parts of ourselves. And this divide in our culture that I think is responsible for so much that is a problem in our culture."

Honors

At the 2013 Sundance Film Festival, Soloway received the Directing Award (United States, Drama) for her first film, the 2013 comedy-drama Afternoon Delight. She has 3 Emmy nominations. Soloway is also a member of the board of the San Francisco Film Society. 

In 2015, Soloway's show Transparent won a Golden Globe for Best Series - Musical or Comedy. Later that same year, Soloway won a DGA Award and a Primetime Emmy Award for her work directing episode 108 of the show. Also in 2015, she was named as one of The Forward 50.

Personal life

In 2011, Soloway married music supervisor Bruce Gilbert, with whom she has been in a relationship since 2008. They have a son named Felix Soloway Gilbert. Her older son, Isaac, is from a prior relationship. She was in a relationship with Dennis "Dink" Adams, a key grip, who was featured in her book and who she referred to as her "husfriend" for at least 4 years when she was in her early 40s.

Soloway lives in the Silver Lake neighborhood of Los Angeles.

Activism

	 Soloway is a strong supporter of feminism

	 Co-founded the website wifey.tv.

	 Co-founded the East Side Jews collective, which is funded by the Jewish Federation of Greater Los Angeles.

Works or publications

	 Bright, Susie, Eric Albert, Greta Christina, and Jill Soloway. "Jodi K." (novella) Susie Bright Presents: Three Kinds of Asking for It : Erotic Novellas. New York: Simon & Shuster, 2005. ISBN 978-0-743-24550-0

	 Soloway, Jill. Tiny Ladies in Shiny Pants: Based on a True Story. New York: Free Press, 2005. ISBN 978-0-743-27217-9


