
#Article: Thomas H. Fallon
#Type: regular article

Thomas H. Fallon was a Massachusetts educator, lawyer, politician who served as the Mayor of Malden, Massachusetts, and United States Administrative Law Judge for the Social Security Administration.

Mayor of Malden

Thomas H. Fallon served as Mayor of Malden from 1982 to 1986.

United States Federal Administrative Law Judge, 1994 to 2010.

Biography

Thomas Henry Fallon, known as a Champion of Education during his terms on the Malden School Committee and as Mayor of Malden, his hometown, died Monday, August 16, 2010, surrounded by his family, after a short illness. He was 68.

Born February 16, 1942 in Malden, Massachusetts, Thomas H. Fallon attended the Immaculate Conception Parish School and Malden Catholic High School. After graduating, Thomas attended Boston College where he achieved a B.A. in English and was commissioned a Second Lieutenant of the United States Army. Thomas served active duty overseas as a Field Artillery Officer of the United States Army and later remained in the United States Army Reserves. After overseas service, Fallon taught English at Woburn Memorial High School. While doing so, Thomas achieved a law degree from Suffolk University Law School and was admitted to the Massachusetts Bar Association in 1971.

Thomas H. Fallon led an extraordinary life. A retired Captain in the United States Army, he was the son of the late Malden Police Sergeant Henry G. Fallon and the late Catherine Fallon, who had four children.

Continuing his call to service, Thomas H. Fallon was elected to the Malden School Committee in 1971. From 1972 to 1973, Thomas Fallon served as an Assistant Register of Probate for Middlesex County, and in 1973 he began serving as Assistant City Solicitor for the City of Malden. He also established a private law practice in Malden.

He served as Chairman for an eight-year term. After serving the School Committee, including two terms as Chairman, Thomas Fallon was elected Mayor of Malden from 1982 to 1986. This was at a difficult time, as cities and towns statewide were facing cuts when the tax-limiting law, Proposition 2-1/2, took effect in 1982. Fallon was 39 and already had 11 children.

As the Mayor of Malden, Thomas Fallon established a Human Rights Commission and spearheaded adoption of the first human rights ordinance in Malden and the appointment of the City's first Affirmative Action Officer. Thomas Fallon also established a beautification program that continues today in Malden and has served as a model for other communities. Thomas Fallon was instrumental in revitalizing the City through rehiring and bringing new development and businesses into the City, and his restructuring of the Malden community led to the restoration of public confidence.

Thomas Fallon made numerous contributions to and was actively involved in many civic and professional organizations. Most notably, he was a lifetime member of the Disabled American Veterans, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, Malden Post No. 639, the Reserve Officers Association, and the Association of First Corps of Cadets. He was a past Council Member of the Middlesex County Bar Association, and a member and past director of the Kiwanis Club of Malden. He was also a former Arbitrator-Panel Member for the American Arbitration Association.

Thomas H. Fallon served Malden from 1971 to 1986. He served as a United States Administrative Law Judge for the Social Security Administration from 1994 until the time of his death.


