
#Article: Tom Kovach
#Type: regular article

Thomas H. "Tom" Kovach (born May 27, 1969), is a Delaware attorney and politician who is the New Castle County Council President. A Republican, he ran for the United States House of Representatives seat for Delaware's At-large congressional district in 2012, and lost to incumbent John Carney

Early life

Kovach was born in Woodbury, New Jersey, but grew up in northern Delaware, where he became an Eagle Scout. He earned undergraduate degrees in chemical engineering and psychology from the University of Delaware in 1992 and went to work for the Environmental Protection Agency as an enforcement officer before receiving a law degree from Rutgers University five years later. He then went on to practice environmental law and commercial litigation, at one time chairing these positions in the Delaware State Bar Association.

Public service

State representative

Immediately after the 2008 elections, Democrat Dianna Williams announced that she would be resigning her office. Governor Ruth Ann Minner announced a special election five days before Christmas to fill the seat. Kovach won an upset victory and came into office with the 2008 class. He sat on the Education, Energy and Veterans Affairs Committees, among others. He sponsored legislation to make state government more transparent and also tried to move school board elections to coincide with general elections in order to save money and increase voter participation. He lost reelection during the 2010 election by 400 votes.

New Castle County President

Following the election of New Castle County Executive Chris Coons to the U.S. Senate, New Castle County President Paul Clark was elevated to fill the remainder of his term. This left a vacancy in the office of the presidency, and a special election was called for January 2011. Kovach was chosen as the Republican candidate for this position, running against county councilman Tim Sheldon, a Democrat. He won the election with 57% of the vote, making him the first member of his party to win this office in 23 years. As president, Kovach has worked to promote transparency and decrease the size of county government. During a State of the County address by New Castle County Executive Paul Clark in 2012, Kovach suggested more work be done to reduce the costs of county services.

United States House of Representatives campaign

In October 2011 Kovach announced that he would run for U.S. Congress. He faced Rose Izzo in the Republican primary. Kovach defeated Izzo in the primary and faced Democratic freshman Representative John Carney During a debate with Carney, Kovach criticized government regulations as harming jobs, saying, "Government needs to get out of the way." He opposed the Affordable Care Act (commonly called Obamacare) and criticized stimulus packages as failing to "address the fundamental problems" with the economy. He also supported a better energy policy and spending less overseas as means of bringing down budget deficits. He went on to lose the election to Carney, receiving 33% of the vote.

Election results

Personal life

Kovach is married to Sandi; the couple has three children. Not forgetting his scout days, Kovach has served as an assistant scoutmaster. He has also coached youth soccer.


