
#Article: Tottie Goldsmith
#Type: regular article

Tottie Goldsmith (born Caroline Goldsmith on 27 August 1962) is an Australian actress and singer.

Television and radio work

In the early 1980s, Goldsmith acted in Australian soap operas The Young Doctors, Starting Out and Prisoner, and was a panelist on such programs as All Star Squares. She was known as a sex symbol early in her career, and posed nude for art magazine Black+White in August 1996.

Goldsmith was the host of Sex/Life, a Network Ten program in the mid-1990s. She later acted in the drama series Fire, the police drama series Blue Heelers, and in The Secret Life of Us.

In the late 1990s, she co-hosted a breakfast program on Melbourne radio station TTFM, replacing Nicky Buckley.

Goldsmith made various one-off appearances on Australian TV shows in the late 2000s, including Bert's Family Feud, Big Questions, ABBAmania, Surprise Surprise Gotcha, and Celebrity Singing Bee. Then in 2009, Goldsmith appeared in Neighbours for three months as Cassandra Freedman.

Goldsmith performed the opening act at the 2010 Antenna Awards. She played Janet in a season of the New Rocky Horror show, and participated in The Arena Spectacular of Grease the musical. Goldsmith appeared in the 2010 Australian film 'Ricky! The Movie' as the ex-girlfriend of Ricky T, and as a gangster's girlfriend in Underbelly.

Chantoozies

From 1986 Goldsmith was one of four female lead vocalists of the Australian band the Chantoozies, including actress Eve von Bibra and actress Ally Fowler  They released three singles: "Witch Queen", "He's Gonna Step On You Again" and "Wanna Be Up", and an album, Chantoozies. Goldsmith left the Chantoozies to pursue a solo singing career before the band released their second album, Gild the Lily in 1991.

Other work

Goldsmith has released two meditation and relaxation CDs.

Personal life

Goldsmith is the daughter of Melbourne restaurateur and nightclub owner Brian Goldsmith and British-born actress Rona Newton-John. Her great-grandfather was German physicist and Nobel Prize winner Max Born. Olivia Newton-John is her aunt, bass guitarist Brett Goldsmith her elder brother, and racecar driver Emerson Newton-John her half brother.

Goldsmith was married to skier Steven Lee and they had a daughter Layla. She became engaged to business man James Mayo in January 2008. 


