
#Article: Troy Grant
#Type: regular article

Troy Wayne Grant (born 11 February 1970), an Australian politician, is the Deputy Premier of New South Wales and New South Wales Leader of The Nationals since October 2014. Grant has been a member of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly representing Dubbo for the The Nationals since 2011. Grant is the Minister for Justice and Police, the Minister for Racing and the Minister for the Arts in the Baird government, since April 2015.

In April 2014, Grant was appointed as the Minister for Hospitality, Gaming and Racing and the Minister for the Arts in the First Baird government. Grant gained additional portfolio responsibilities in October 2014 and in addition to the above responsibilities, he also served as the Minister for Trade and Investment, Minister for Regional Infrastructure and Services, and the Minister for Tourism and Major Events until 2 April 2015.

Early years and background

A police officer for 22 years, Grant has twice has been decorated with Commendations for Courage by the Commissioner of the New South Wales Police Force. He has implemented a number of community-based policing initiatives in Gilgandra and Brewarrina and he has received other awards, including the Premier’s Public Sector Award. Grant led the paedophilia investigation into Catholic priest Vincent Ryan, and has said "there is nothing I would not do in order to protect the children of NSW" from sexual abuse.

Grant can speak the Wiradjuri language, the native language of a large part of inland NSW.

Political career

Grant was endorsed by the National Party as its candidate in Dubbo in June 2010, after a pre-selection battle with one other candidate, also a police officer.  At the March 2011 elections, Grant was elected and received a swing of 14.5% in the traditionally strong Nationals seat, winning 63.7% of the vote on a two-party preferred basis. Grant actually won 60 per cent of the primary vote, enough to take the seat without the need for preferences. Grant defeated the incumbent independent politician Dawn Fardell, ending a 12-year hold by independent candidates. In accordance with electoral procedures, he resigned his commission as a police officer.

Due to the resignation of Barry O'Farrell as Premier, and the subsequent ministerial reshuffle by Mike Baird, the new Liberal Leader, in April 2014 Grant was appointed as Minister for Hospitality, Gaming and Racing, Minister for the Arts, and appointed as a member of Cabinet.

On 15 October 2014, state Nationals leader and Deputy Premier Andrew Stoner stood down for family reasons. The next day, on 16 October, Grant was elected party leader and the following day he was sworn in as Deputy Premier of New South Wales, assuming the majority of Stoner's former ministerial responsibilities.


