
#Article: Tung Chee-chen
#Type: regular article

Tung Chee-chen (), SBS, JP (b. circa 1942) is a Hong Kong businessman and entrepreneur. He is a member of the Hong Kong Port Development Board.

Biography

Tung's ancestral hometown is Ningbo of Zhejiang Province. Tung is the second son of international shipping tycoon Tung Chao Yung, and the young brother of Tung Chee Hwa, the first chief executive of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.

Education

He earned a BSc degree from the University of Liverpool. He later earned his master's degree in Mechanical Engineering from MIT.He was awarded the degree of Doctor of Laws (Honoris Causa) from the University of Liverpool on 6 July 2009.

Career

Tung served as chairman of the Hong Kong Shipowners' Association from 1993 until 1995. He was chairman of the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce from 1999 to 2001. Since 1997, Tung is the chairman and CEO of Orient Overseas (International) Limited, one of the largest shipping companies in the world.

He is independent non-executive director of the following companies:

	 PetroChina Co. Ltd., a Chinese SOE

	 Zhejiang Expressway Company Ltd., a Chinese SOE

	 BOC Hong Kong (Holdings) Ltd., a Chinese SOE

	 Wing Hang Bank Ltd.

	 Sing Tao News Corporation Ltd.

	 Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd.

	 U-Ming Marine Transport Corporation, a unit of the Far Eastern Group

Affiliations

Tung is also the chairman of the Institute for Shipboard Education Foundation (most popularly known as Semester-At-Sea Program), the chairman of the Advisory Council and a member of the board of trustees of the Hong Kong Polytechnic University and a member of the board of trustees of the International Academic Center of the University of Pittsburgh and the Georgetown University's School of Foreign Service.

Wealth

In April 2009, Tung was ranked as the 23rd wealthiest man in Hong Kong, worth US$900 million. In Jan 2008, Tung and his family were ranked (also by Forbes) as the 16th wealthiest in Hong Kong, with a total value of 3 billion US$.


