
#Article: Umaru Mutallab
#Type: regular article

Alhaji Umaru Abdul Mutallab (born 15 December 1939) is a Nigerian business and banking leader, and former minister of Economic Development under the military government of Murtala Mohammed. He played a major role in introducing Islamic banking into Nigeria. Mutallab was described by The Times in 2009 as being "one of the richest men in Africa", by The New York Times as "among Nigeria's richest and most prominent men," by The Telegraph as being "one of Nigeria's most prominent bankers", and by The Guardian as being "one of the country's most respected businessmen". Mutallab's son, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, is a student who attempted to detonate plastic explosives aboard Northwest Airlines Flight 253 on 25 December 2009.

Biography

Mutallab was born in Katsina Town, Katsina State, Nigeria. He lives in Funtua, in Katsina State in Muslim north Nigeria, though reportedly the family owns homes in London and Ghana as well. The family owns at least three homes in Nigeria (in Abuja, Funtua, and Kaduna).

Education

Mutallab attended Barewa College, Zaria, Achimota College, Accra, Ghana, and the South West London College, London. He was awarded an honorary doctoral degree by the Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife.

Career

Mutallab was a Federal Commissioner (i.e., Minister) of Economic Development (1975) and of Cooperatives and Supplies (1976). He was later a member of Nigeria's Federal Executive Council (1976-78). He left to serve as Executive vice-chairman, managing director, and CEO of the United Bank for Africa (UBA) (1978-88).

He is the former Chairman of Nigeria's oldest and largest bank, First Bank of Nigeria Plc (1999-2009).

Mutallab has also served on the boards of directors of several companies, including Arewa Textile Limited, NEPA, NACB, NCC, Nigeria Agip Oil, and Cement Company of Nigeria, and in 2009 was Chairman of several companies, including Impresit Bakolori Plc, Incar Nigeria Plc, and Spring Waters Nigeria Limited (SWAN).

He is chairman of the Nigeria's first Islamic bank, Jaiz Bank International Plc, which was established in 2003.

Mutallab is chairman of the Business Working Group of the Vision 20:2020 Committee in Nigeria, and president of the Old Boys Association of Barewa College. He is a Fellow of both the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (FCCA) and the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Nigeria (FCA).

Mutallab was awarded the title of Commander of the Order of the Niger, one of Nigeria's highest honours.

Son: Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab

Mutallab reported to two CIA officers at the US Embassy in Abuja, Nigeria, on 19 November 2009, regarding his son's "extreme religious views", and told the embassy that he might be in Yemen. His son's name was added in November 2009 to the US's 550,000-name Terrorist Identities Datamart Environment, a database of the US National Counterterrorism Center. His US visa was not revoked. On 25 December 2009, was implicated in the attempted bombing of Northwest Airlines Flight 253.


