
#Article: V. Ravichandran
#Type: regular article

Veeraswamy Ravichandran (born 30 May 1961), known mononymously as Ravichandran (ರವಿಚಂದ್ರನ್), is an Indian film actor, director, music director and editor best known for his work in Kannada cinema. He is often considered as "The Show Man" of Kannada cinema for his multi-faceted works in his associated films.

Son of notable film producer N. Veeraswamy, Ravichandran made his acting debut in Khadeema Kallaru (1982) at the age of 21 as an antagonist and followed it up with Chakravyuha in 1983. After starring in a series of multi-starrers in supporting and lead roles, he cast himself in his directorial debut Premaloka (1987) which became one of the highest grossing blockbuster films in Kannada cinema.  As a producer, he continues to run Sri Eswari Productions. He is fondly and popularly known as the Crazy Star of Kannada cinema.

Personal life

Ravichandran was born in Bangalore, Karnataka, India on 30 May 1961. His parents are N. Veeraswamy and Pattammal. His father N. Veeraswamy is the notable producer of South Indian film industry. Ravichandran married Sumathi, on the Valentine's Day; 14 February 1986. The couple have a daughter Geethanjali and two sons Manoranjan and Vikram. Manoranjan is making his acting debut in a Kannada film slated for release in 2015.

Film career

As an actor

Ravichandran started his film career in the early 1980s and acted in many movies along with well-known actors of the Kannada industry, including Vishnuvardhan, Ambarish, Prabhakar and Rajesh produced by his father. His first movie was Khadeema Kallaru(as one of the villains). Ravichandran's initial movies were box-office hits. His major commercial success as a leading actor came from Premaloka, a romantic comedy movie starring Juhi Chawla in the female lead role.Premaloka became all-time blockbuster and cemented Ravichandrans position.He became noted for his mesmerising looks and charismatic style. He was at peaks in late 80s to mid 90s Post-Premaloka, Ravichandran starred in several hits, most notably Ranadheera (which was a remake of Subhash Ghai's Hero), Anjada Gandu, Yuddha Kaanda, Ramachaari, Halli Meshtru, Gadibidi Ganda, Annayya, Sipayi, Yaare Neenu Cheluve, Mangalyam Tantunanena Preethsod Thappa and Malla. Ravichandran best pairs with South Indian actress Kushboo.

His role as an innocent village bumpkin in Ramachaari was featured at the Ontario Film Festival. He has stuck to mostly stereotyped roles: a police officer (Shanti Kranti and Abhimanyu), lover (Premaloka, Anjada Gandu, and Preethsod Thappa), pop singer (Yuga Purusha, and Gadibidi Ganda), rustic Sipayi, Chikkejamanru, Halli Meshtru, and Malla, and lawyer (Brahma Vishnu Maheshwara and Yuddha Kaanda).

As director

Ravichandran shot to instant fame when Premaloka, which he produced, directed, and starred in, became one of the landmark films in Kannada film history. It was made with a budget of a crore rupees, the most expensive Kannada film in its time. It starred Juhi Chawla as the female lead. Also Vishnuvardhan, Ambarish, Tiger Prabhakar and other superstars of that period played guest role in the movie respecting their long time association with Eshwari Productions.Premaloka also established Hamsalekha, who would teamed up with Ravichandran for a long period.

Premaloka broke several records and defined much of Ravichandran's later film making. It set the stage for lavish productions in the Kannada film industry, and inspired a generation of directors. Ravichandran is generally credited with introducing a culture of producing big-budget films in Kannada.Ravichandran initially acted in and directed movies produced by his own banner, Eswari Productions. After Premaloka, he accepted acting offers from other producers. He has worked with directors of the Kannada film industry such as S. V. Rajendra Singh Babu and D. Rajendra Babu.

As producer

Ravichandran first movie as a producer is not from his father company, he started his own company(Ravi Cine Creation)and produced "Prema Matsara" he announced the date of release with list of theatre on the Muhurth day itself. The movie turned out a break even financially for him.The second movie he produced was "Kadima Kallaru" and also appeared in a small role for the first time and this was his first movie as actor. It was financial disaster in the box office. He also produced a Hindi movie with Amitabh bachchan and Shridevi Inquilaab (film) which was a remake of blockbuster Kannada movie "Chakravyuha" starring Ambareesh and Ambika in lead role.

In 1991, Ravichandran released Shanti Kranti, the costliest movie ever made in South India till then. Considered his magnum opus, the film was shot over four years with a budget of 40 million rupees, and was simultaneously made in Kannada, Telugu, and Tamil. The movie was commercial failure, due to it slow paced story telling and Ravichandran suffered huge losses financially and morally. 

Music director

Ravichandran is credited with "discovering" the talented Hamsalekha. Together, they worked in over 25 films and created several popular numbers. However, the duo parted company after Preethsod Thappa, only to work again in Ondagona Baa, which was a commercial and musical failure. In Hamsalekha's absence, Ravichandran took up the role of a music director and created a few popular tunes in Ekangi and Aham Premasmi. But critics generally consider him a below average music director. He also got a state award as the best musical director.

Ravichandran started his own audio company, "Eswari Audio", which later was renamed into "Eshwari Entertainments". For his brother's debut movie, Aham Premasmi, he bypassed the entire music industry and sold the music cassettes through cable operators to beat piracy and brought " Digital Grading " Technology to Kannada Film Industry and also brought color technicians from abroad.

Television

Ravichandran has done a spectacular debut to Kannada television as a talent show judge. Dancing Star-season 2 on Colors Kannada saw him as a very popular judge. He continued his relationship with the show when Channel launched the extension of the show: Dancing Star Junior.

Filmography

Awards

	 Karnataka State Award for Best Director, Actor, Music Director for Ekangi

	 Karnataka State Puttanna Kanagal Award for Lifetime Achievements.

	 Suvarna Filmfare Award for Lifetime Achievements

	 Kannada Rajyotsava Award on 2010

	 Special Technical State Award for Shanti Kranti

	 Udaya Film Award for best Supporting Actor - Aham Premasmi


