
#Article: Wali Tasar Uddin
#Type: regular article

Wali Tasar Uddin, MBE (ওয়ালি তাসার উদ্দিন; born 17 April 1952) is a Bangladeshi-born British entrepreneur, restaurateur, community leader and humanitarian.

Early life

Uddin was born in Maulvi Bazar, Sylhet District, Sylhet Division, East Bengal (now Bangladesh) where he completed his education. In 1977, at the age of 25, he moved to the United Kingdom, and began to work in restaurants in London. In 1976, after gaining a good reputation in the catering business, he moved to Edinburgh, Scotland.

Community work

Uddin has received many awards for his contribution and work in the communities. In 1984, he was appointed as the Justice of the peace, the first Bangladeshi to hold the post, and from 1993 to 1997 he became the first Bangladeshi to be a member of the Honorary Consul in Scotland.

Business career

Uddin is also notable for being successful in the Indian restaurant industry in Scotland, most notably for owning the "Britannia Spice" restaurant, which has received over 10 awards for being one of the top restaurants in Scotland. His son now runs the "Verandah on Haymarket," which has been frequented by many A list stars including Clint Eastwood and Sir Cliff Richard. He also has long chain of Indian restaurant companies throughout the United Kingdom, and is the chairman of the Universal Koba Corporation Limited.

Other work

Uddin is the current chairman of the British-Bangladesh Chamber of Commerce, which was created in 1991. The Chamber has operated as a networking business hub for the British Bangladeshi community who have British business or interests in Bangladesh. The organisation has held a number of trade and investment meetings with such as the Home Secretary and the then Prime Minister of Bangladesh.

Awards and recognition

In 1995, Uddin was appointed a Member of the British Empire (MBE) in the 1995 New Year Honours for his services to race relations.

Personal life

Uddin is married to Syeda, and has five children.

See also

	British Bangladeshi

	Business of British Bangladeshis

	List of British Bangladeshis


