
#Article: Willow Bay
#Type: regular article

Willow Bay (born Kristine Carlin Bay; December 28, 1963) is an American television correspondent, editor, author, and former model. She is currently director of the USC Annenberg School of Journalism    and was previously senior editor for the Huffington Post and a special correspondent for Bloomberg Television. She is married to Walt Disney Company CEO Robert Iger.

Life and career

Bay was born Kristine Carlin Bay in New York, New York. She is a former fashion model, represented by Ford Models throughout her career. Bay was often featured in Seventeen magazine, and was the model and spokesperson for Estée Lauder cosmetics from 1983 to 1989.

She served as a correspondent for NBC's Today Show.

Bay was a co-anchor of ABC's Good Morning America Sunday for four years and a correspondent for ABC's World News Saturday and World News Sunday. From 1991 to 1998, Bay was co-host with Ahmad Rashad of NBA Inside Stuff.

She was an anchor for CNN, hosting two primetime programs, CNN & Entertainment Weekly and CNN & Fortune, along with CNN’s flagship financial news program, Moneyline. She was a freelance anchor and correspondent for MSNBC and NBC News in 2005 and 2006. Bay was also the executive producer and host of Lifetime Television's Spotlight 25.

She is also the author of a book titled Talking to Your Kids in Tough Times: How to Answer Your Child’s Questions About the World We Live In (2003).

At the Huffington Post she served as a senior editor based in Los Angeles. Bay has helped manage the expansion of non-political content and new verticals for the site. In collaboration with Yahoo! News and the Huffington Post, Bay most interviewed Warren Buffett and President Bill Clinton for the Newsmaker series.

Personal life

Bay attended the all-girls Dominican Academy in New York, and graduated from Phillips Academy, Andover. She then attended the University of Pennsylvania as an undergraduate. She earned her MBA from the Stern School of Business at New York University.

She has two sons with her husband Robert Iger, the current CEO of the Walt Disney Company, whom she married in 1995.


