
#Article: Peng Wan-ru
#Type: regular article

Peng Wan-ru (, July 13, 1949 - November 30, 1996) was a feminist Taiwanese politician. The director of the Democratic Progressive Party's (DPP) Women's Affairs Department, Peng advocated for the safety and development of women. Peng married Horng Wann-sheng (, a mathematics professor at NTNU) and they had a son together.

Murder

In November 1996, Peng disappeared in Kaohsiung, Taiwan; the public last saw her board a yellow Ford Telstar taxi after a DPP meeting the night prior to a DPP convention. She was discovered raped and murdered outside of an abandoned warehouse in Kaohsiung County (now part of Kaohsiung City); her body had more than 30 stab wounds. 

Despite an extensive investigation, the police were unable to solve the crime. At least 70,000 Taiwanese taxi drivers had their fingerprints analyzed in an effort to find Peng's killer. Hung said that he felt frustrated that the killer was not found. There have been numerous false leads since the murder.

Response and Legacy

Peng's murder produced an outcry against the lack of protection women have in Taiwan. Peng's proposed quota for one fourth of the seats of the elected seats to be reserved for women passed during the November 30, 1996 DPP National Congress meeting; the public believes that Peng died during that day.

Peng's death, along with two other well-publicized murder cases, led to mass demonstrations in May 1997. Demonstrators marched on  and , demanding Premier Lien Chan's resignation over the perceived rise in violent crime as evidenced by the then-unsolved murders of Pai Hsiao-yen, Peng Wan-ru and Liu Pang-yu.

The Peng Wan-ru Foundation (), an organization named after Peng and established in 1997 by Peng's husband, supports women wishing to enter the labour force. It trains women for participation in their child-care programs; once they have passed the courses, the Foundation matches them with households or elementary schools in need of child care.

See Also

	 Murder of Pai Hsiao-yen

	 Liu Pang-yu


