
#Article: Christian Meier
#Type: regular article

Christian Meier (born Christian Dietrich Meier Zender on June 23, 1970 in Lima) is a Peruvian actor and singer in Latin America, the US Hispanic market, and around the Spanish speaking world.

Biography

Meier was born on June 23, 1970 in Lima, Peru, the youngest of four siblings. He is the son of Gladys Zender, Miss Universe 1957, and Antonio Meier, Peruvian politician who in 2006 was elected mayor of the Lima district of San Isidro, and has two older sisters: Sibylle & Karina Meier Zender and one older brother, Antonio Meier Zender. He studied at the Miraflores Maristas School, a Marist Brothers congregation school. After finishing high school he studied Graphic Design graduating in early 1992.

Career

Musician

In 1987, he formed the popular Peruvian alternative-rock band Arena Hash  with Pedro Suárez Vértiz, Patricio Suárez Vértiz and Arturo Pomar. Between the 1980s and early 1990s, he was the keyboardist of the band, and also did some singing. A few years later the band broke up and some of its members pursued a solo career.

In 1996 Meier released an album, No Me Acuerdo Quién Fui, which produced the singles, "tus huellas entre la mías" and "Carreteras Mojadas" (Wet Highways) that got the first positions in almost all radio station charts in Peru. the album went double platinum. In 1997 began the production of his second album Primero en Mojarme, with Manuel Garrido-Lecca, a well known musical producer that he worked with in Arena Hash. In 2002 Christian produced Once Noches, probably the album that brought him the most accolades. It contained the singles "Alguien" and "Novia de nadie" a duet featuring Spanish singer Mikel Erentxun.

Acting

Christian has acted and starred in both soap operas and movies. His success has brought him fame in Latin American countries, in the US, Spanish speaking media, and around the Spanish speaking world.He also has his line of perfumes and appeared in commercials.

Personal life

He married Peruvian actress Marisol Aguirre in 1995. They met during the filming of the soap opera "Gorrión". They separated in October 2007, finalizing their divorce in November 2008. They have three children together. He was in a relationship with American actress Genesis Rodriguez.

Movies

Television


