
#Article: Kwek Leng Beng
#Type: regular article

Kwek Leng Beng (; born 1940) is a Singapore businessman. He is the Executive Chairman of Hong Leong Group Singapore. In 2015 Forbes estimated his net worth to be US$7.4 billion..

Early life

Kwek's father, the late Kwek Hong Png left Tongan, Fujian province, China as a penniless teenager for Singapore and subsequently founded the Hong Leong group there. Kwek Leng Beng was trained as lawyer in London, but chose to join the family business in the early 1960s. 

Career

He became chairman in 1990 and went on to establish an international reputation for his leadership of the Hong Leong Group, which is now a conglomerate with more than 300 companies, including 12 listed ones.

Kwek is the Chairman of City Developments Limited (CDL), an International Property and hotel Conglomerate and the Leading Real Estate Developer in Singapore . It operates in 20 countries in Asia, Europe, North America and Australasia. The City Development Limited Group has over 250 subsidiaries and associated companies including 8 companies listed on the stock exchanges of Singapore, London, Hong Kong, Amsterdam, New Zealand and Manila. CDL has a market capitalization of US$5.8 billion and ranks just outside Singapore's top 10 listed companies. It is also the second-biggest property developer in Southeast Asia.

Kwek Leng Beng also chairs Millennium & Copthorne (M&C) Hotels, which is a London-listed international hotel group of which a 53% share belongs to CDL. M&C is ranked 40th among the world's top international hotel groups and has a portfolio of over 120 owned and managed hotels with about 36,500 rooms in 19 countries (including those in the pipeline).  In an interview, Kwek mentioned that the Millennium Resort Patong is the first resort operated by the group in Phuket.

Kwek's Hong Leong Group also owns Hong Leong Finance, which is Singapore's largest finance company, with a network of 28 branch offices. Kwek Leng Beng is a member of the Board of Trustees of the Singapore Management University. He also holds an honorary doctorate (DUniv) from Oxford Brookes University. Kwek oversees the Singaporean operations of the Hong Leong Group, while his cousin and fellow billionaire Quek Leng Chan oversees the Malaysian.

Personal life

He is married with two children and lives in Singapore.


