
#Article: Božidar Đelić
#Type: regular article

Božidar Đelić (Божидар Ђелић, ; born 1 April 1965, Belgrade) is a Serbian economist and politician. He was the Serbian Minister of finance in the first post-Milošević government of Zoran Đinđić in 2001-03, and vice-president of the government from May 2007 to December 2011, from the list of Democratic Party.

Early life

Đelić was born in Belgrade in 1965, an only child.

Đelić's parents divorced soon after his birth and went abroad in search of better prospects, while he stayed behind in Belgrade where he was raised by his maternal grandparents. He later described his grandmother Mileva as the strongest figure in his childhood. When his grandparents died in 1973, he moved to Paris to live with his mother and stepfather in Paris. When her small business collapsed, Božidar helped earn his way by washing dishes and cleaning windows, while studying at the same time. In 1980 and 1981, Đelić won French national competitions for high-school students in history and economics.

Education

	MBA (Master of Business Administration), Harvard Business School, Boston, MA, USA, 1991. Fulbright scholarship. Specialized in finance and marketing

	MPA (Master of Public Administration), J.F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1991. Lavoisier scholarship. Specialized in economic policy making

	MA in Economics (Diplôme d’Etudes Approfondies), Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, Paris, France, 1988. Thesis on the effects of real exchange rate instability on growth in emerging countries under the direction of Charles Wyplosz 

	HEC (Hautes Etudes Commerciales) diploma, Jouy-en-Josas, France, 1987. Entered this top French business school after a national entrance exam with 7% acceptance ratio. Specialized in strategy and finance 

	IEP (Institut d’Etudes Politiques) Lauréat (summa cum laude, graduated in the top 5% of a class of 800), Paris, France, 1987. Specialized in public administration and law 

	Twice winner (lauréat du Concours général) of the prestigious national French scholarly competition in geography and economy in 1980-81.

Career

From 2008-11, Đelić was Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration, as well as Minister for Science and Technological Development. During that period he was chief negotiator for Serbia's entry to the European Union (EU). From 2007-08, Đelić was the sole deputy to the Prime Minister. Chief negotiator for the entry of Serbia into the EU. Governor for Serbia of the World Bank Group and Deputy Governor of the EBRD.

In January 2014, Djelic joined Lazard Investment Bank in Paris.


