
#Article: Lisa Whelchel
#Type: regular article

Lisa Diane Whelchel (born May 29, 1963) is an American actress, singer, songwriter, author, and public speaker. She is known for her appearances as a Mouseketeer on The New Mickey Mouse Club and her nine-year role as the preppy and wealthy Blair Warner on The Facts of Life. In 1984, she was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Inspirational Performance for her contemporary Christian album, All Because of You. Since 2009, she has been a regular speaker with Women of Faith Christian conferences. In 2012, Whelchel participated as a contestant in Survivor: Philippines, the 25th season of the American CBS competitive reality television series Survivor, reaching the finale and tying with Michael Skupin for second place.

Personal background

Lisa Whelchel was born on May 29, 1963, in Littlefield, Texas. She is the daughter of Virginia "Genny" (née French), a real estate agent, and James Senior "Jimmy" Whelchel, an electrician. Her parents divorced in 1981, and her mother married Roy Coleman in 1983. Lisa is the elder sister of James Junior "Cody" Whelchel, and the elder half-sister of Casey Justice Coleman. She also has a nephew, Chasin (Cody's son). Lisa and Cody were raised for most of their childhood in Fort Worth, Texas.

When Whelchel was ten years old, she became a born-again Christian and has devoted her life to her Christian faith. On July 9, 1988, Whelchel married Steven Cauble, who was an associate pastor at The Church on the Way in Van Nuys, California, which Whelchel attended at the time. The couple, who have three adult children, divorced in March 2012.

Acting career

The New Mickey Mouse Club

At age 12, Whelchel was recruited, in Texas, by talents scouts who were looking for children interested in working with Disney Studios as a Mouseketeer on The New Mickey Mouse Club. She moved to California the next year and appeared on the show in syndication from 1977 to 1978.

The Facts of Life

As a cast member of The Facts of Life, Whelchel once refused a storyline that would have made her character the first among the four young women in the show to lose her virginity. Having become a Christian when she was ten years old, Whelchel refused because of her Christian convictions, and the storyline was rewritten for the character of "Natalie," portrayed by Mindy Cohn.  Whelchel appeared in every episode of the series except that one.

In 2001, Whelchel reprised her role as Blair Warner for the made-for-television movie, The Facts of Life Reunion.

On March 7, 2004, Whelchel was reunited with Charlotte Rae to perform The Facts of Life theme song at the 2nd Annual TV Land Awards at the Hollywood Palladium in Hollywood. In spring 2006, she appeared with two of her Facts of Life co-stars on The Today Show to promote the show's DVD releases of the first and second seasons, admitting to being "bummed out" that Kim Fields was unable to attend. On February 1, 2007, Whelchel was reunited with Kim Fields on WFAA-TV's Good Morning Texas. Fields was in Dallas to promote her appearance in the production Issues: We've All Got 'Em, when Whelchel was introduced as a surprise guest. On April 10, 2011, Whelchel and the cast of The Facts of Life, including Charlotte Rae, Nancy McKeon, Mindy Cohn, Kim Fields, Geri Jewell, and Cloris Leachman were honored with the Pop Culture Award at the 9th Annual TV Land Awards at the Javits Center in New York City.

Music career

In 1984, Whelchel released a Christian pop album entitled All Because of You. The album reached No. 17 on the Billboard Contemporary Christian music charts. She was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Inspirational Performance and was recognized as the writer of the title song, "All Because of You". Among the songs featured on the album were "All Because of You", "Just Obey", "Cover Me Lord", and "Good Girl". She did not record a second album. While she was appearing on The Facts of Life, she made a cameo appearance in the music video for contemporary Christian music singer-songwriter Steve Taylor's song "Meltdown (at Madame Tussaud's)". The song was the title track from the album Meltdown.

Speaking

Whelchel has been a regular inspirational speaker at churches and conferences nationwide since 2004. In 2000, she founded Momtime Ministries, a religious network of mothers' groups who meet weekly to "equip and refresh and encourage" each other. In 2009, she began touring with the Women of Faith conferences, speaking on various issues including motherhood, child discipline, and friendship.

Writing

Whelchel has written ten books on motherhood, child discipline, adult friendships, homeschooling, and finding Jesus through the development of holiday traditions. Additional topics from a spiritual point of view include prayer and wisdom. She is the bestselling author of So You're Thinking About Homeschooling and The Facts of Life (and Other Lessons My Father Taught Me).

While Whelchel has been honored as a Gold Medallion nominee for her book on child discipline, entitled Creative Correction, she has received negative press and criticism by both Christian and non-Christian parenting groups for her views. In an 2005 interview with talk show host Drew Marshall, Whelchel spoke about her books on motherhood and shared her ideas on child discipline presented in the book.

Survivor

On August 20, 2012, Whelchel was announced as a contestant in Survivor: Philippines as a member of the Tandang tribe. She joined retired Major League Baseball star Jeff Kent as the season's two "celebrity" contestants. She elected to keep her true identity as a former television star secret from the other contestants, many of whom were too young to have watched The Facts of Life during its original run and thus did not recognize her. However, this fact was revealed by fellow contestant Jonathan Penner to the jury at the final tribal council.

On November 14, 2012, Whelchel announced via her Twitter account that she was suffering from West Nile Virus and had been advised by her doctor that recovery would take approximately one year. She did not specify whether she had contracted the arbovirus while in the Philippines shooting Survivor.

On December 16, 2012, Whelchel made it to the finale, receiving one jury vote from RC Saint-Amour and tying with returning contestant Michael Skupin for runner-up. She was also voted the Sprint Player of the Season, winning $100,000 by a margin of about .07 percent against Malcolm Freberg.

Hosting duties

On January 14, 2013, Whelchel co-hosted several episodes of The Jeff Probst Show with Probst.

Published works

	 Whelchel, Lisa. Creative Correction, Tyndale House Publishers, 320 pages, 2000. ISBN 978-1561799015

	 Whelchel, Lisa. The Facts of Life (and Other Lessons My Father Taught Me), Multnomah Books, 192 pages, 2001. ISBN 978-1590521489

	 Whelchel, Lisa. So You're Thinking About Homeschooling: Fifteen Families Show How You Can Do It (2nd edition), Multnomah Books, 224 pages, 2005. ISBN 978-1590525111

	 Whelchel, Lisa. How to Start Your Own Mom Time

	The ADVENTure of Christmas: Helping Children Find Jesus in Our Holiday Traditions

	Taking Care of the Me in Mommy

	The Busy Mom's Guide to Prayer

	The Busy Mom's Guide to Wisdom

	The Busy Grandma's Guide to Prayer

	Speaking Mom-ese: Moments of Peace & Inspiration in the Mother Tongue from One Mom's Heart to Yours

Filmography

Honors and awards

Young Artist Awards

	1982: Nominated, "Best Young Comedienne in a Motion Picture or Television" - The Facts of Life

	1982: Nominated, "Best Young Actress in a Television Special" - Twirl

	1983: Nominated, "Best Young Actress in a Comedy Series" - The Facts of Life

	1984: Nominated, "Best Young Actress in a Comedy Series" - The Facts of Life

See also


