
#Article: Bridget Fonda
#Type: regular article

Bridget Jane Fonda (born January 27, 1964) is an American actress. She is known for her roles in such films as The Godfather Part III, Single White Female, Point of No Return, It Could Happen to You, and Jackie Brown. She also provides the voice for Jenna in the 1995 animated feature film Balto. She is the daughter of Peter Fonda, niece of Jane Fonda and granddaughter of Henry Fonda.

Personal life

Fonda was born in Los Angeles, California, to a family of actors, including her grandfather Henry Fonda, father Peter Fonda, and her aunt Jane Fonda. Her mother, Susan Jane Brewer, is an artist. She is named after actress Margaret Sullavan's daughter Bridget Hayward. Her maternal grandmother, Mary Sweet, married businessman Noah Dietrich.

Sullavan was Henry Fonda's first wife. Bridget's parents divorced and Peter remarried Portia Rebecca Crockett (former wife of author Thomas McGuane). Peter and Portia raised Bridget, her brother Justin, and older stepbrother Thomas McGuane Jr. in the Coldwater Canyon section of Los Angeles and south of Livingston, Montana. Fonda attended Westlake School for Girls in Los Angeles. In 1986, Bridget met Eric Stoltz and, in 1990, they began dating. The relationship ended after eight years.

On February 27, 2003, she suffered a serious car crash in Los Angeles which caused a fracture in her vertebra. In March of the same year, she became engaged to film/TV composer and former Oingo Boingo frontman Danny Elfman, and they married in November. They have a son named Oliver.

Fonda endorsed President Barack Obama for re-election in 2012.

Career

Fonda became involved with the theatre when she was cast in a school production of Harvey. She studied method acting at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts and the Lee Strasberg Theatre Institute and graduated from NYU in 1986.

She made her film debut at the age of five in the 1969 movie Easy Rider as a child in the hippie commune that Peter Fonda and Dennis Hopper visit on their trek across the United States.Her second (non-speaking) part was in the 1982 comedy Partners. In 1988, she got her first substantial film role in Scandal. That same year she appeared in You Can't Hurry Love and Shag.

Her breakthrough role was as a journalist in The Godfather Part III. After gaining additional work experience in a few theater productions she was cast in the lead in Barbet Schroeder's Single White Female, followed by a role in Cameron Crowe's ensemble comedy Singles (both 1992).

A notable action-drama role was in 1993's Point of No Return. A review in the New Yorker proclaimed her "provocative, taunting assertiveness". In 1997, she was on the same plane flight as Quentin Tarantino when he offered her the part of Melanie in Jackie Brown. She was also reportedly offered the lead, eponymous role in the television series Ally McBeal but turned it down to concentrate on her film career. She took on cameo roles in projects until 2002, and has not appeared in films since then.

Filmography

Award nominations

	1990: Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture for Scandal

	1997: Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie for In the Gloaming

	2002: Golden Globe Award for Best Performance by an Actress In A Mini-series or Motion Picture Made for Television for After Amy


