
#Article: Eamon Ryan
#Type: regular article

Eamon Ryan (born 28 July 1963) is an Irish politician and leader of the Irish Green Party. He was a Teachta Dála (TD) for the Dublin South constituency from 2002 to 2011, and served as Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources from 2007 to 2011.

Early and personal life

Ryan was born in Dublin and raised in Dundrum where he continues to live. He was educated at Gonzaga College and University College Dublin where he graduated with a Bachelor of Commerce degree. He was manager of the UCD Marketing Development Programme from 1985-86 and following three years of emigration and unemployment in 1989 he founded Cycling Safaris, a company which organises cycling holidays in Ireland and Europe. He married the author and journalist Victoria White in 1998 and they have four children.

Political career

He first became involved in politics in 1998 when he was co-opted to Dublin City Council. He topped the poll at the 1999 local elections in the Rathmines electoral area. From 1995 to 2002 he served on the advisory committee of the Dublin Transport Office. At the 2002 general election he was first elected to Dáil Éireann as a TD for Dublin South. He served as Green Party spokesperson for Transport, Enterprise, Trade and Employment and Communications, Marine and Natural Resources during the 29th Dáil.

He announced on 13 September 2004 that he intended to ask his party to nominate him as a candidate for the 2004 presidential election. However, when it was announced that the incumbent, Mary McAleese, was seeking a second term he withdrew. His campaign was also hit by his admission of cannabis use, an illegal drug.

In government

He was re-elected at the 2007 general election. Following the Green Party's special convention vote in favour of entering into a coalition government with Fianna Fáil and the Progressive Democrats on 13 June 2007, Ryan was appointed to the cabinet as Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources when the 30th Dáil sat the following day.

Minister for Communications, Energy and Natural Resources

As Minister, he stated his priorities would be to improve upon the changes underway in the Irish energy sector, with strong emphasis on aiding the adaptation of renewables and building retrofitting. He also aimed to enhance communications infrastructure where Ireland had fallen behind other countries.

Record in office

During Ryan's period in office, installed wind capacity in Ireland doubled, and by 2010 the average daily energy derived from renewable sources (as a percentage of total demand) had increased to 17%, peaking at 42%. He also committed Ireland to the European Super Grid programme in 2009 and announced major government investment in Marine energy research projects. Government schemes were expanded for home energy retrofitting as uptake increased, the National Broadband Scheme was completed, a Broadband for Schools Scheme launched, and a national electric vehicle and chargepoint initiative was announced in conjunction with the ESB Electric Ireland and Peugeot Citroën, which was subsequently implemented by the new government.

Criticisms

Environmental activists Shell to Sea and its spokesperson Maura Harrington, criticised Ryan for joining Fianna Fáil in coalition as the terms of the programme for government did not include a reversal or renegotiation of the proposed gas pipeline and refinery at Broadhaven Bay, County Mayo. Before entering into government, Ryan visibly supported the aims of the Shell to Sea campaign and attended their protests. Ryan was also criticised by Shell to Sea for failing to launch an independent review of the decision, as stipulated by the Green Party in a motion passed at their annual convention in 2007.

2011 general election and Green Party leadership

Ryan resigned as Minister on 23 January 2011 when the Green Party withdrew from government. The following day he helped broker an agreement with Fine Gael and the Labour Party which insured the passing of the 2011 Finance bill prior to the holding of the general election on the 25 February 2011. He subsequently lost his seat at the 2011 general election receiving 6.8% of the vote. As part of his pension Ryan will receive a lump sum of €110,000 and an annual pension of €51,000 when he is 65, in 2028.

He was one of three candidates to contest the subsequent Green Party leadership election of May 2011. He was elected leader on 27 May 2011, succeeding John Gormley.

In 2012 he became an associate with E3G working on an assessment of the development potential of the North Seas Offshore Grid Initiative in a project which was supported by the European Climate Foundation and the Children’s Investment Fund Foundation. In 2013 he organised two climate gatherings which brought international climate experts to Ireland to examine what new narratives are needed to increase public support for action on the climate issue. 

He ran as the Green Party candidate in the Dublin constituency for the 2014 European Parliament election but was not elected.


