
#Article: Michael Cudlitz
#Type: regular article

Michael Cudlitz (born December 29, 1964) is an American actor, known for portraying John Cooper on the TNT drama series Southland, Sergeant Denver "Bull" Randleman on the HBO miniseries Band of Brothers, and Sergeant Abraham Ford on the AMC horror series The Walking Dead.

Early life

Cudlitz was born in Long Island, New York and grew up in Lakewood Township, New Jersey. 

Cudlitz is a 1982 graduate of Lakewood High School. 

Cudlitz has a BFA from the California Institute of the Arts, where he graduated in 1990.

Career

After graduating from CalArts, Cudlitz worked for many years as a character actor, in small parts in both film and television.From the time he was a student at CalArts until he landed the role in Band of Brothers, Cudlitz supported himself by working in TV and film production in the art department of various shows. He said he did this work for between 8 to 10 years. Cudlitz had a long-term position as part of Local 44 working on Beverly Hills, 90210, where he had a key position coordinating the construction of sets.

His first acting role was in the 1989 film Crystal Ball, playing Scottie. Other roles included playing Tony Miller on Beverly Hills, 90210, and Tad Overton on Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story. He has also played various roles in CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, the second seasons of 24 and Lost, and Prison Break. He also guest starred on Over There and had a regular role on the FOX series Standoff. He also had a small, but highly memorable and well received, role in the 1997 dark comedy Grosse Pointe Blank as the former big man on campus, and later drug addicted and highly frustrated Bob Destepello.

A breakout role for Cudlitz was his portrayal of Sgt. Denver "Bull" Randleman in the World War II miniseries, Band of Brothers.

Cudlitz starred on the critically acclaimed drama Southland as patrol officer John Cooper, a 20-year veteran and training officer. The show started its run as an NBC show, but was canceled after seven episodes. It was picked up by TNT, who aired the remaining episodes of its first season, bringing it back for a total of five seasons. The character struggled with chronic back pain, addiction to pain medication, and ethical issues relating to his partners. Prior to the start of shooting for the show, Cudlitz had a large mole removed from his right upper lip, which had previously been a signature feature of his appearance. The show was cancelled in 2013. Cudlitz won the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for his role in 2013.

In 2009, Cudlitz appeared in the science fiction film Surrogates as Colonel Brendon. In 2013, Cudlitz played opposite Melanie Griffith in the movie, Dark Tourist.

Since February 2014, he has appeared in AMC TV show The Walking Dead as Sergeant Abraham Ford, a character from the comic series of the same name. His first appearance was in the tenth episode of Season 4, an episode entitled "Inmates". The role quickly became a fan favorite with Cudlitz becoming a series regular.

Voice work

Cudlitz supplied the voice of Sgt. Glenn "Hawk" Hawkins in the video game Call of Duty 2: Big Red One. He voiced Corporal Griffen in the video game Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare and its sequel, Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3.

Awards

	 2013: Critics Choice Awards, Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series, Southland

	 2013: Entertainment Industries Council PRISM Awards, Southland (episode: "Legacy")

Personal life

Cudlitz is married to his wife, Rachel Cudlitz. They met while students at California Institute of Arts. They have twin sons.

Filmography

Film

Television (miniseries, TV movies, shorts)

Television (episodic)

Video games

Art department

	 1988: The Unnamable - Carpenter

	 1986-1988: Tales from the Darkside - Carpenter (12 episodes) 

	 1989: W.B., Blue and the Bean - Set construction

	 1989: C.H.U.D. II - Bud the Chud - Carpenter

	 1990-1993: Beverly Hills, 90210 - Construction coordinator (65 episodes) 

	 1996: Dunston Checks In - Propmaker gang boss

	 1998: American History X - Construction coordinator

	 2007: Nobel Son - Propmaker


