
#Article: André Esteves
#Type: regular article

André Santos Esteves was ranked by The Forbes World's Billionaires as #628 with a net worth of US$2.2 billion. Among Brazilian billionaires, Esteves is ranked as #13 with a net worth of R$9.07 billion.

Personal life

André Esteves born into a middle-class family in Rio de Janeiro, and obtained his Bachelor's degree in computer science from the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.  Esteves has three children, and The New York Times writes that "he has driven the same Mercedes pickup for four years and takes only two weeks of vacation a year."  Andre Esteves owns a Dassault Falcon private jet worth $50 million USD. When interviewed about his downtime, "Esteves professes a love of his job, though he also enjoys cinema, wine and good food."

Career

After graduating from the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, André Esteves joined Pactual and within "a year he was a member of the bank's foreign debt trading team, and within two he was managing IPOs and M&A deals." In 1992, Esteves made a partner for helping the bank "to post a 59 percent return on capital". UBS purchased Pactual in December 2006, and in June 2008, Esteves left the bank along with key Brazilian partners to create BTG, a global investment company. In April 2009, Esteves, along with other partners, purchased Pactual back from UBS for $2.5 billion. Andre Esteves arrives at his office as early as 6:30 AM and "often calls partners together for meetings as late as 10:00 p.m." He also holds regular study meetings with BTG Pactual directors at his home.

Philanthropy

James Crombie of LatinFinance writes that "Esteves supports education and environmental charities. He is a board member of Conservation International." André Esteves has also donated to Harvard Business School, in order that Baker Hall might be renovated; it will be renamed Esteves Hall, in honour of him. This Harvard dormitory is used by many international students, especially those from Esteves' home country, Brazil.

Controversy

Insider trading

In April 2012, André Esteves was fined €350,000 for insider trading in Italy and officials "also froze €4.2 million of Mr. Esteves's personal assets and barred him from acting as an officer in an Italian company for six months."  Italy’s Consob did this because they stated that "the 43-year-old Latin American banker bought the shares in November 2007 knowing that the group was planning to enter a joint venture with Brazilian rival JBS." Esteves' insider trading "forced the bank to amend its prospectus, give investors the option of reconsidering bids for BTG shares, and put a cloud over one of this year's highest profile bank deals." Reuters reported that the "Consob said it notified Esteves of its accusations in November 2010. It said Esteves denied the allegations." Furthermore, Andre Esteves planned to "appeal the action", but did not do so, citing cost and a loss of time as his reasons.

In 2013, Charles Rosier, a partner of BTG Pactual, was convicted in the largest insider trading case in the history of France. While at UBS, at the end of March and early April 2008, he and his cousin Joseph Raad used inside information to purchase shares and options in Geodis just before the announcement of a takeover bid. Of significance, Rosier worked at UBS when he participated in the insider trades when André Esteves, now CEO and partner and director of BTG Pactual, was still employed by UBS as head of fixed income in charge of $1.7 trillion USD. Esteves had also committed inside trades while at UBS only a few months earlier in November 2007. Also of significance, Huw Jenkins, partner and director and chairman of BTG Pactual and formerly CEO of UBS Investment Bank, was a consultant to UBS at the same time.

Pactual sale to UBS and resale to BTG

Arthur Rutishauser in Sonntagszeitung argued that the way Esteves acquired 27% of his bank is an example of an insider case: Esteves sold the bank in 2006 for 3.1 billion Swiss Francs to UBS, where at that time Huw Jenkins was a key decision maker, and heavily involved in that transaction. Esteves later repurchased Pactual back in 2009 for 2.5 billion Swiss Francs after being allowed to leave UBS to set up BTG. Huw Jenkins was ejected from UBS in 2007 and disappeared from view, to then resurface as a senior partner and Board member at BTG Pactual in 2010.

Lawsuit in Hong Kong by Ex-Employee Zeljko Ivic

The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of BTG Pactual André Esteves, and a member of the board of directors Huw Jenkins, reportedly "made fraudulent misrepresentations to get Zeljko Ivic to sign agreements with Banco BTG Pactual SA, according to a lawsuit filed with the Hong Kong High Court." Robert Tibbo, Zeljko Ivic's attorney, has stated that Zeljko Ivic played a key role in Banco BTG Pactual SA's IPO. Ivic states that he was the key player in fundraising with nine entities, including the China Investment Corporation, GIC Private Limited, as well as the Agnelli and Rothschild families. As such, Ivic is making a case against Banco BTG Pactual SA, BTG Pactual Asia Ltd., CEO Andre Esteves and director Huw Jenkins, and $20 million USD is the amount of the lawsuit, which will serve as compensation for the value of BTG Pactual's shares, promised partnership and unpaid bonuses to Zeljko Ivic.

Conflict with Brazilian Regulators and Central Bank

‘’Bloomberg L.P.’’ reported that “In three separate cases since 1999, Brazil’s central bank and securities commission alleged Pactual had illegally transferred profits to foreign funds to disguise gains and avoid taxes.” As such, “Esteves and his partners received warnings in the first two incidents.” Furthermore, “In the third, he and another partner were ordered to pay a combined settlement of 100,000 reais ($50,000), with Pactual paying another 4 million reais.”

Involvement in Sete

On 19 June 2015, Marcelo Odebrecht, the CEO of Brazil’s largest construction company was arrested by Brazilian Federal Police. Odebrecht was arrested on allegations of fraud, corruption, money laundering and organized crime relating to contracts worth billions of dollars with the rigs company Sete and the state oil company Petrobras. While in detention, Odebrecht attempted to pass a handwritten note to his lawyers that included and mentioned André Esteves, thus potentially implicating BTG Pactual and Andre Esteves in Lava Jato. One of Sete’s largest shareholders is BTG Pactual headed by CEO André Esteves. In the handwritten note, Odebrecht requested his lawyers to “destroy rigs’ email.”Sete Brasil was founded aiming to facilitate and enable the construction of ultra-deep water drilling rigs in the country. Seven companies became investors of the company, the pension funds: Petros, Previ, Funcef and Valia, besides the banks Santander, Bradesco and BTG Pactual. Next, Petrobras joined to this group of investors. Development bank BNDES, which previously agreed to extend financing, withheld funds after former Sete Brasil COO Pedro Barusco testified in late 2014 that he accepted bribes in exchange for awarding contracts as part of a wider corruption probe known as Lava Jato (Carwash in Portuguese). In the first quarter of 2015, BTG Pactual recorded a provision for the impairment to the investment equivalent to approximately 25% of its book value, which had a gross negative impact to revenues of R$280million.

Arrest

On 25 November 2015, Esteves was arrested as part of a scandal investigation into Petrobras after he was investigated for his bank's dealings with the oil company. On November 29, 2015 it was reported that the Brazilian Supreme Court decided to extend banker's arrest, according to Esteves's lawyer. According to the same report by Bloomberg News, BTG Pactual’s partners are in talks to buy Esteves’s 22% to 24% stake including a "golden share" which gave the former CEO control of the firm.


