
#Article: Gideon Sa'ar
#Type: regular article

Gideon Sa'ar (גִּדְעוֹן סַעַר; born 9 December 1966) is a former Israeli politician who served as a member of the Knesset for the political party Likud between 2003 and 2014. He also held the posts of Minister of the Interior and Education Minister.

Early and personal life

Gideon Moses Zarechansky (later Sa'ar) was born in Tel Aviv. His mother, Bruriah, is of Bukharian Jewish descent  while his father, Shmuel, immigrated to Israel from Argentina in the mid-1960s, settled in Sde Boker and became the personal physician of David Ben-Gurion. Sa'ar has two siblings, a brother and a sister.  After serving in the Israel Defense Forces, Sa'ar studied political science at Tel Aviv University and then went on to study law at the same institution. He worked as an aide to the Attorney General between 1995 and 1997, and then as an aide to the State Attorney until 1998.

In May 2013, Sa'ar married Israeli news anchor Geula Even, who is the mother of their son, David. He has two children from his first wife.

Political career

He worked as a secretary to the cabinet in 1999 and again from 2001-2 after Likud's Ariel Sharon won a special election for Prime Minister. In the 2003 elections he won a seat in the Knesset on Likud's list, and was appointed Likud Parliamentary Group Chairman. He was opposed to Israel's unilateral disengagement plan, and attempted to pass a bill demanding a referendum on the subject.

After retaining his seat in the 2006 elections he was reappointed Group Chairman and also became a deputy Knesset speaker.

Whilst in the Knesset, Sa'ar has proposed bills to jail employers who fire pregnant women, (he chaired the Knesset Committee on the Status of Women) and to ban cosmetics testing on animals.

In December 2008 Sa'ar won the Likud primaries for its list going into the 2009 elections, giving him second place on the Likud list after leader Binyamin Netanyahu. He retained his seat, and was appointed Minister of Education on 31 March.

In 2012, he again gained the most votes in Likud primaries, and entered the 19th Knesset.


