
#Article: Charles Djou
#Type: regular article

Charles Kong Djou (born August 9, 1970) is an American politician who served as U.S. Representative for Hawaii's 1st congressional district in 2010-11. As a member of the Republican Party, Djou won his congressional seat in a special election in May 2010, but was defeated in the general election in November. Djou, who previously served in the Hawaii House of Representatives and the Honolulu City Council, is the first Thai-American and the first Chinese-American Republican to serve in the U.S. House of Representatives.

Early life, education and career

Born in Los Angeles, California, to a Chinese-American father and a Thai-American mother, Djou grew up in Hawaii. He graduated from high school at Punahou School, and earned a Bachelor of Arts in political science and a Bachelor of Science in finance from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania graduating magna cum laude. He earned his law degree at the University of Southern California Law School.

Djou is a major in the United States Army Reserve. He has taught as an adjunct professor of law at the University of Hawaii and as an adjunct professor of political science at Hawaii Pacific University.

Djou served as the Vice Chairman of the Hawaii Republican Party from 1998 to 1999. He was named legislator of the year by Small Business Hawaii in 2002, 2004, and 2006. In 2006 he was selected as one of the 40 most promising leaders in Hawaii under age 40 by Pacific Business News, and in 2005 was named by Honolulu Weekly as the "Best Politician" in the state.

Hawaii House of Representatives

Elections

In 1998, Djou ran as a Republican for the Hawaii State House of Representatives District 47 seat. He was unopposed in the primary election, but lost to Iris Ikeda Catalani in the general election by a margin of 190 votes.

In 2000, he again ran for the Hawaii State House of Representatives District 47 seat. Unopposed in the primary, he faced incumbent Democrat Iris Ikeda Catalani in the general election. Catalani faced controversy in the campaign, with allegations that she broke a promise to the Outdoor Circle by posting yard signs. Djou won the race, gaining 52.5 percent of the vote to Catalani's 44.2 percent.

Tenure

As a member of the State House of Representatives, Djou served one term in the Hawaii House of Representatives from 2000 to 2002 and was the Minority Floor Leader. Djou launched a successful campaign to open the State Budget worksheets to the public after being told he could look at the budget worksheets in the committee room but was not allowed to take any notes or make copies of them. The documents detail the budget for various state departments and agencies. He opposed the state "van cam" program launched in 2002 to catch speeders using automated cameras instead of police officers, and successfully campaigned for its elimination.

Honolulu City Council

Elections

In 2002, Djou announced he would run for the Honolulu City Council. He also announced he would move to East Honolulu (City Council District IV) from Kaneohe (City Council District III) to avoid running against fellow Republican Stan Koki. Honolulu City and County elections are officially non-partisan, and any candidate who wins a majority of the votes in the primary election can win outright. However, no candidate received a majority of the votes in the primary election, and Djou and opponent Robert Fishman, a former City Managing Director and Chief of Staff to the Governor, faced each other in a run-off in the general election. Djou won with 51.3 percent of the vote, to Fishman's 39.2 percent.

Djou ran for reelection to the Honolulu City Council. He was unopposed and won the seat by default.  Djou subsequently served as the Hawaii co-chair of former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani's campaign for President in 2008.

Tenure

In 2002, Djou was elected to the Honolulu City Council, representing District IV (Waikiki to Hawaii Kai). He was re-elected in 2006 and served until his election to Congress. On the City Council he was the Chairman of the Zoning Committee, Vice Chair of the Planning Committee and as a member of the Transportation and Public Safety & Services committees.

U.S. House of Representatives

Elections

2010 special

In March 2010, Djou announced he would run for U.S. Congress, seeking a seat in Hawaii's 1st congressional district. The seat was vacant because Neil Abercrombie had resigned to run for Governor of Hawaii. Djou was endorsed by former Massachusetts Governor and Presidential candidate Mitt Romney.  Djou subsequently endorsed Romney's campaign for president in the summer of 2011. Former Hawaii Congresswoman Patricia Saiki, whom Djou had once volunteered for as a teenager, served as Djou's campaign chair.

The election was held in May, with Djou receiving 39.4 percent of the vote. He defeated five Democrats, four Republicans, and four independent candidates. Among the candidates Djou defeated were former Congressman Ed Case and State Senator Colleen Hanabusa, two Democrats who together polled over 58% of the vote.  Djou served the remainder of the 2010 term and ran for a full term in November 2010. Djou was sworn in three days later. He is the first Republican to represent the district in 20 years. Djou joined Neil Abercrombie and Patsy Mink as the third person in history to have served in the Honolulu City Council, Hawaii State Legislature and U.S. Congress, and the first to be elected to all three chambers before age 40.

There has been some controversy over the use of robocalling by the Congressman's official U.S. House office, both before the election and afterwards. However, as with all official mass communication between Members of the House and their constituents, the phone survey conducted on behalf of Congressman Djou's office was approved by the bipartisan Franking Commission as an appropriate use of official resources for the purpose of communicating with constituents.

2010 general

Djou was defeated by Democratic nominee State Senator Colleen Hanabusa. Djou was one of only two Republican incumbents (Joseph Cao was the other) to lose in the 2010 general election on November 2, 2010.

2012

Djou announced on August 17, 2011 that he would challenge Colleen Hanabusa in Hawaii's 1st congressional district in 2012. A major in the U.S. Army Reserve, Djou suspended his campaign for six months while deployed to Afghanistan with the 3rd Brigade Combat Team, 10th Mountain Division, from September 2011 to March 2012. Djou lost to Hanabusa in the general election, with 44.4% (96,774) of the vote.

2014

Djou ran for the 1st district again in 2014. Although Djou garnered a greater percentage of the vote in a general election than any other Republican running for Congress in Hawaii since 1988, he still narrowly lost to Democrat Mark Takai, who garnered 51.2% of the vote.

Committee assignments

	 Committee on Armed Services

	 Subcommittee on Readiness

	 Subcommittee on Terrorism and Unconventional Threats

	 Committee on the Budget

Tenure

	Civil unions and gay marriage

Djou opposed Hawaii House Bill 444, a bill to legalize civil unions for same-sex and opposite-sex couples, and supports the federal Defense of Marriage Act. He stated that lawmakers "ignored the will of the people" who enacted Hawaii Constitutional Amendment 2.

	Don't ask, don't tell

Djou was one of a handful of Congressional Republicans who voted in favor of an amendment to the 2011 Department of Defense Authorization Bill that would repeal the "Don't ask, don't tell" law and allow gays to serve in the U.S. military.

	Immigration

Djou supported comprehensive immigration reform and was one of eight Republicans who voted for the DREAM Act to allow immigrants brought to the U.S. as children earn citizenship through service in the military or obtaining a college education and a job.

	South Korean Free Trade Agreement

On May 28, 2010, Djou spoke on the floor of the House in support of approving the South Korean Free Trade Agreement, which was signed by former President George W. Bush on June 30, 2007. Congress approved the agreement on October 11, 2011.

Personal life

Djou is married to Stacey Kawasaki Djou, a Japanese-American. They have three children. His surname "Djou" is a French transcription of his Chinese surname Zhou.

Djou served on the Board of Directors of the American Lung Association and was a member of the Neighborhood Board. He is a member of the Young Business Roundtable, the Rotary Club, and the Hawaii Telecommunications Association.


