
#Article: Phedon Papamichael
#Type: regular article

Phedon Papamichael ASC (Φαίδων Παπαμιχαήλ), born 1962, is a Greek cinematographer and film director.

Life and career

He was born in Athens, Greece in 1962 to a Greek father and a German mother. When Phedon was six years old, his family relocated to the United States, as his father, a well-known artist and set designer, was offered a job as a production designer for John Cassavetes. From an early age, he was involved in cinema. He studied photography and art at the University of Munich and received his Bachelor in Fine Arts in 1982.

His first job as a cinematographer was in the film Dance of the Damned in 1988.

He later made his debut as a director in the film Showtime’s Sketch Artist in 1992 and two years later he directed Dark Side of Genius. 

He has been a member of the American Society of Cinematographers since 2000.

In 2000 he was awarded the Prix Vision of the Avignon Film Festival for his cinematography in 27 Missing Kisses.

As a cinematographer, he has shot nearly fifty films, including Phenomenon, America's Sweethearts, Sideways, Walk the Line, The Weather Man, The Monuments Men, and Nebraska, for which he won an Academy Award nomination. He has worked with directors Alexander Payne, Oliver Stone and George Clooney, and many others, and has also directed films, such as Sketch Artist, Dark Side of Genius, From Within, Arcadia Lost.

He has worked with Hollywood stars Will Smith, John Travolta, George Clooney, Tom Cruise, Nicolas Cage, Russell Crowe, Cameron Diaz and others, and maintains a long-term friendship with Joaquin Phoenix and Dustin Hoffman. 

He spends his time between Los Angeles and Leonidio, Greece.

In an interview with Greek Reporter Papamichael said, ”I want to spend more time in Greece from next year. My parents live there and my home is also there. I visit Los Angeles regularly just for my job. Obviously, I will move permanently to Leonidio some time in the future. It’s unlikely to live the twilight of my life in the United States.”

Selected filmography

Cinematography

Directing

	 Sketch Artist (1992) (TV film)

	 Dark Side of Genius (1994)

	 From Within (2008)

	 Arcadia Lost (2009)

	 Lost Angeles (2012) (in post-production)


