
#Article: JWoww
#Type: regular article

Jennifer Lynn "Jenni" Farley (born February 27, 1986), also known as JWoww, is an American television personality. She first came to prominence as one of the eight main cast members in the MTV reality series Jersey Shore, and is a main cast member of its spin-off, Snooki & JWoww. She has also made several appearances on other shows, such as TNA Impact! and Disaster Date. She and her fiancé are currently cast members on Marriage Boot Camp: Reality Stars. JWoww also promotes a line of suntanning products with the Australian Gold Company.

Early life

Farley was born in Franklin Square, New York. She attended Columbia High School, in East Greenbush, New York, and New York Institute of Technology. She is of Spanish and Irish descent. Before starting her career, she spent time working as a nanny for small children.

Career

Before coming onto Jersey Shore, Farley owned a graphic design business, Jenni Farley Designs, Inc. In December 2009, at the age of 23 years, Farley began appearing in Jersey Shore in which she and seven other housemates spent the summer in the Seaside Heights of New Jersey. The second season was filmed in Miami, Florida, and then the third season returned to New Jersey. A fourth season of the series was filmed in Florence, Italy, and the final two seasons moved back to Seaside Heights.

Farley launched a line, "Filthy Couture," in a Las Vegas, Nevada runway show in July 2010. After four months of operation, the line ceased sales in October 2010 due to a threatened trademark lawsuit. Farley stated that the brand was not over and a new line would be released. In April 2011, MTV announced that it ordered two Jersey Shore spin-off series, one of which will feature Farley and castmate Nicole Polizzi. Twelve episodes were ordered for the first season. In 2010 she released a book titled The Rules According to JWOWW: Shore-Tested Secrets On Landing A Mint Guy, Staying Fresh To Death, and Kicking the Competition to the Curb. In 2012, she was sued for allegedly filming several episodes of her reality show without proper authorization from her landlord.

In 2012, Farley and her Jersey Shore costar, Nicole Polizzi began starring in Snooki & JWoww, which premiered on MTV on June 21, 2012. The first season was filmed over the course of six weeks at a former two-story firehouse located near Grove and Mercer Streets in Jersey City, New Jersey, followed Polizzi and Farley moving in together, and was described as a modern-day Laverne & Shirley. JWoww also hosted MTV's Club New Year's Eve 2013 with Polizzi and Jeff Dye to ring in 2013. The duo did star again in the second season of Snooki & JWoww, which followed the stars at their actual permanent residences, and premiered on January 8, 2013. It was renewed for a third season.

In October 2011, JWOWW launched her official website

In January 2013, Farley ranked in GQ magazine's "Sexiest 100 Ladies of the 21st Century" list.

In 2015, Farley competed and won the seventh season of Worst Cooks in America: Celebrity Edition. Farley also made her feature film debut starring in the indie production, The Mint, in which she played the girlfriend of a record executive and also served as the film's executive producer.

TV and film appearances

Personal life

Jenni Farley and longtime boyfriend Roger Mathews got engaged in September 2012. On Christmas 2013, it was announced via Twitter that Jwoww and her fiancé Roger were expecting their first child. Farley gave birth on July 13, 2014 to a girl named Meilani Alexandra Mathews. On October 18, 2015, Farley and Mathews wed and announced at the reception that she is pregnant with their second child together. On October 30, 2015, it was announced that Farley and Mathews are expecting a boy, due in May 2016.

Activism

Farley is a strong supporter of gay rights and has come out strongly in defense of the LGBT community in two separate Twitter wars. The first was a result of Bristol Palin speaking out against President Barack Obama's support of gay marriage. Farley stated, "Bristol should keep her uneducated, ignorant mouth shut. If you're living in the past you wouldn't have a kid without marriage. Hypocrite. It's 2012!" Farley wrote "My best friend will get married one day and not just have civil union with his man. Stop hating people."  In October 2012, her former Jersey Shore co-star Angelina Pivarnick spoke out against gay marriage and suggested that if gay people wanted to, they could change their sexual orientation. Farley fired back at her former co-star and reiterated her strong support for gay rights.


