
#Article: Lars Mikkelsen
#Type: regular article

Lars Dittmann Mikkelsen (born May 6, 1964) is a Danish actor perhaps best known to international TV audiences for his roles as Copenhagen mayoral election candidate Troels Hartmann in the drama series The Killing., Charles Augustus Magnussen, the primary villain in the third series of Sherlock, and the Russian President Viktor Petrov in House of Cards on Netflix. He is the older brother of actor Mads Mikkelsen.

Early life

Mikkelsen was born in Gladsaxe near Copenhagen and his younger brother is the actor Mads Mikkelsen. After secondary school he enrolled for military service in the Royal Danish Army. He then studied biology at the University of Copenhagen but gave up the course to earn his living as a street performer in European cities with his mime and juggling acts.

Acting career

At the age of 27 he enrolled at the National Theatre School of Denmark from which he graduated in 1995. In addition to his role in the drama series released worldwide as The Killing  he subsequently appeared in two other internationally acclaimed Danish drama series, Those Who Kill and Borgen III. He also had a leading role in an episode of the BBC drama Sherlock as Charles Augustus Magnussen, an intelligent and quietly dominant villain who blackmails his victims and is loathed by Sherlock.

In addition to his native Danish, Mikkelsen speaks fluent Swedish, German and English, and he has mastered various accents. He has stated that he and his brother first picked up English by listening to Monty Python records and learning the comedy sketches.

Personal life

He is married to actress Anette Støvelbæk. They have been a couple since 1986 and married in 1989. They have two sons, Lue and Thor.

Filmography

Film

Television

Animated films/series/shorts

	 Huset Anubis (2010) - Hr. Van Swieten

	 Tiger-brødre (2004) - Aidan McRory

	 Arthur and the Invisibles (2006) - Malthazar

	 The Wild (2006) - Samson

	 Go West! A Lucky Luke Adventure (2007) - Lucky Luke

	 Bee Movie (2007) - Ken

	 Meet the Robinsons (2007) - Onkel Arthur

	 Monsters vs. Aliens (2009) - General O.K. MacMission

	 The Dam Keeper (short) (2014) - The Narrator


